---
layout: post
title: "Defending Jesus Deity: Jesus Is God Because Only God Created All Things! ✝️"
date: 2022-08-09 19:26:34 -0500
categories: god jesus deity bible cults
published: true
---

## Jesus Is The Creator God

`Formal Equivalence (Word-For-Word)`
- Received Text (Textus Receptus)

    > **All things** were made by him; and without him was not any thing made that was made. &mdash; John 1:3 KJV (48.83% / 66.58%)

    > For by him were **all things** created, that are in heaven, and that are in earth, visible and invisible, whether they be thrones, or dominions, or principalities, or powers: **all things** were created by him, and for him: 17 And he is before **all things**, and by him **all things** consist. &mdash; Colossians 1:16-17 KJV (48.83% / 66.58%)

	--

    > **All things** were made through Him, and without Him nothing was made that was made. &mdash; John 1:3 NKJV (60.32% / 65.21%)

    > For by Him **all things** were created that are in heaven and that are on earth, visible and invisible, whether thrones or dominions or [a]principalities or [b]powers. **All things** were created through Him and for Him. 17 And He is before **all things**, and in Him **all things** consist. &mdash; Colossians 1:16-17 NKJV (60.32% / 65.21%)

- Majority Text

    > **All things** were made through him. Without him, nothing was made that has been made. &mdash; John 1:3 WEB (World English Bible)

    > For by him **all things** were created in the heavens and on the earth, visible things and invisible things, whether thrones or dominions or principalities or powers. **All things** have been created through him and for him. 17 He is before **all things**, and in him **all things** are held together. &mdash; Colossians 1:16-17 WEB (World English Bible)

- Critical Text

	> **All things** came into being through Him, and apart from Him nothing came into being that has come into being. &mdash; John 1:3 LSB (NASB '95 61.65% / 67.99%)

    > For in Him **all things** were created, both in the heavens and on earth, visible and invisible, whether thrones or dominions or rulers or authorities⁠—**all things** have been created through Him and for Him. 17 And He is before **all things**, And in Him **all things** hold together. &mdash; Colossians 1:16-17 LSB (NASB '95 61.65% / 67.99%)

	--

    > **All things** were made through him, and without him was not any thing made that was made. &mdash; John 1:3 ESV (62.36% / 68.74%)

    > For by[a] him **all things** were created, in heaven and on earth, visible and invisible, whether thrones or dominions or rulers or authorities—**all things** were created through him and for him. 17 And he is before **all things**, and in him **all things** hold together. &mdash; Colossians 1:16-17 ESV (62.36% / 68.74%)

`Dynamic Equivalence (Thought-For-Thought)`
- Critical Text

    > God created **everything** through him, and nothing was created except through him. &mdash; John 1:3 NLT (70.08% / 39.90%)

    > for through him God created **everything** in the heavenly realms and on earth. He made the things we can see and the things we can’t see—such as thrones, kingdoms, rulers, and authorities in the unseen world. **Everything** was created through him and for him. 17 He existed before anything else, and he holds all creation together. &mdash; Colossians 1:16-17 NLT (70.08% / 39.90%)

	--

    > Through him **all things** were made; without him nothing was made that has been made. &mdash; John 1:3 NIV (67.20% / 53.10%)

    > For in him **all things** were created: things in heaven and on earth, visible and invisible, whether thrones or powers or rulers or authorities; **all things** have been created through him and for him. 17 He is before **all things**, and in him **all things** hold together. &mdash; Colossians 1:16-17 NIV (67.20% / 53.10%)

	--

    > **All things** were created[a] by him, and apart from him not one thing was created[b] that has been created.[c] &mdash; John 1:3 NET (66.28% / 53.94%)

    > for **all things** in heaven and on earth were created in him—**all things**, whether visible or invisible, whether thrones or dominions,[a] whether principalities or powers—**all things** were created through him and for him. 17 He himself is before **all things** and **all things** are held together[b] in him. &mdash; Colossians 1:16-17 NET (66.28% / 53.94%)

- NET Bible Translator Notes
    
    > a.

[`Messianic Bible translations`](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Messianic_Bible_translations)
- Critical Text
    > **All things** were made through Him, and apart from Him nothing was made that has come into being. &mdash; John 1:3 TLV (Tree of Life Version, Formal Equivalent)

    > For by Him **all things** were created—in heaven and on earth, the seen and the unseen, whether thrones or angelic powers or rulers or authorities. **All was created** through Him and for Him. 17 He exists before **everything**, and in Him **all** holds together. &mdash; Colossians 1:16-17 TLV (Tree of Life Version, Formal Equivalent)

	--

    > **All things** came to be through him, and without him nothing made had being. &mdash; John 1:3 CJB (Complete Jewish Bible, Dynamic Equivalent)

    > because in connection with him were created **all things** — in heaven and on earth, visible and invisible, whether thrones, lordships, rulers or authorities — they have all been created through him and for him. 17 He existed before **all things**, and he holds **everything** together. &mdash; Colossians 1:16-17 CJB (Complete Jewish Bible, Dynamic Equivalent)

`Highly Idiomatic Translation / Paraphrase`
- Critical Text
    > 3-5 **Everything** was created through him; nothing—not one thing!—came into being without him. What came into existence was Life, and the Life was Light to live by. The Life-Light blazed out of the darkness;
    the darkness couldn’t put it out. &mdash; John 1:3-5 MSG (The Message)

    > 15-18 We look at this Son and see the God who cannot be seen. We look at this Son and see God’s original purpose in **everything** created. For **everything**, **absolutely everything**, above and below, visible and invisible, rank after rank after rank of angels—everything got started in him and finds its purpose in him. **He was there before any of it came into existence** and **holds it all together** right up to this moment. And when it comes to the church, he organizes and holds it together, like a head does a body. &mdash; Colossians 1:15-18 MSG (The Message)

## Conclusion

> Thus says Yahweh, your Redeemer, and the one who formed you from the womb,
“I, Yahweh, am the maker of **all things**, Stretching out the heavens **by Myself** And spreading out the earth **all alone**, &mdash; Isaiah 44:24 LSB (NASB '95 61.65% / 67.99%)

Jesus made all things (Jn 1:3; Col 1:16-17), and Yahweh made all of those very same things. You better believe Jesus is Yahweh God! It's as plain as day. Undeniable, irrefutable, Indisputable proof that JESUS IS GOD.

> In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and **the Word was God**. 2 He was in the beginning with God. 3 **All things came into being through Him, and apart from Him nothing came into being that has come into being.** ... 14 And **the Word became flesh, and dwelt among us,** and we beheld His glory, glory as of **the only begotten from the Father,** full of grace and truth. &mdash; John 1:1-3,14 LSB (NASB '95 61.65% / 67.99%)

Is it any wonder that the Apostle John went through great lengths stating just that. 


<script>
	var refTagger = {
		settings: {
			bibleVersion: 'ESV'
		}
	}; 

	(function(d, t) {
		var n=d.querySelector('[nonce]');
		refTagger.settings.nonce = n && (n.nonce||n.getAttribute('nonce'));
		var g = d.createElement(t), s = d.getElementsByTagName(t)[0];
		g.src = 'https://api.reftagger.com/v2/RefTagger.js';
		g.nonce = refTagger.settings.nonce;
		s.parentNode.insertBefore(g, s);
	}(document, 'script'));
</script>