---
layout: post
title: "Defending Jesus Deity: Jesus was prophesied to be God by Isaiah the Prophet ✝️"
date: 2022-08-07 17:51:46 -0600
categories: god jesus deity bible cults
published: true
---

# Jesus was prophesied to be God by Isaiah the Prophet

`Formal Equivalence (Word-For-Word)`
- Recieved Text (Textus Receptus)

    > For unto us a child is born, unto us a son is given: and the government shall be upon his shoulder: and his name shall be called Wonderful, Counsellor, **The mighty God, The everlasting Father**, The Prince of Peace. &mdash; Isaiah 9:6 KJV (48.83% / 66.58%)

    > For unto us a Child is born, Unto us a Son is given; And the government will be upon His shoulder. And His name will be called Wonderful, Counselor, **Mighty God, Everlasting Father**, Prince of Peace. &mdash; Isaiah 9:6 NKJV (60.32% / 65.21%))

- Majority Text

    > For a child is born to us. A son is given to us; and the government will be on his shoulders. His name will be called Wonderful Counselor, **Mighty God, Everlasting Father**, Prince of Peace. &mdash; Isaiah 9:6 WEB (World English Bible)

- Critical Text

    > For a child will be born to us, a son will be given to us;
    And the government will rest on His shoulders;
    And His name will be called Wonderful Counselor, **Mighty God,
    Eternal Father**, Prince of Peace. &mdash; Isaiah 9:6 LSB (NASB '95 61.65% / 67.99%)

    > For to us a child is born, to us a son is given; and the government shall be upon his shoulder, and his name shall be called Wonderful Counselor, **Mighty God, Everlasting Father**, Prince of Peace. &mdash; Isaiah 9:6 ESV (62.36% / 68.74%)

`Dynamic Equivalence (Thought-For-Thought)`
- Critical Text
    > For a child is born to us, a son is given to us. The government will rest on his shoulders. And he will be called: Wonderful Counselor, **Mighty God, Everlasting Father**, Prince of Peace. &mdash; Isaiah 9:6 NLT (70.08% / 39.90%)

    > For to us a child is born, to us a son is given, and the government will be on his shoulders. And he will be called Wonderful Counselor, **Mighty God, Everlasting Father**, Prince of Peace. &mdash; Isaiah 9:6 NIV (67.20% / 53.10%)

    > For a child has been born to us, a son has been given to us. He shoulders responsibility and is called Wonderful Adviser, **Mighty God, Everlasting Father**, Prince of Peace. &mdash; Isaiah 9:6 NET (66.28% / 53.94%)

<!-- - NET Bible Translator Notes
    
    > e. Isaiah 9:6 NET tn גִּבּוֹר (gibbor) is probably an attributive adjective (“mighty God”), though one might translate “God is a warrior” or “God is mighty.” Scholars have interpreted this title in two ways. A number of them have argued that the title portrays the king as God’s representative on the battlefield, whom God empowers in a supernatural way (see J. H. Hayes and S. A. Irvine, Isaiah, 181-82). They contend that this sense seems more likely in the original context of the prophecy. They would suggest that having read the NT, we might in retrospect interpret this title as indicating the coming king’s deity, but it is unlikely that Isaiah or his audience would have understood the title in such a bold way. Ps 45:6 addresses the Davidic king as “God” because he ruled and fought as God’s representative on earth. Ancient Near Eastern art and literature picture gods training kings for battle, bestowing special weapons, and intervening in battle. According to Egyptian propaganda, the Hittites described Rameses II as follows: “No man is he who is among us, It is Seth great-of-strength, Baal in person; Not deeds of man are these his doings, They are of one who is unique” (See Miriam Lichtheim, Ancient Egyptian Literature, 2:67). According to proponents of this view, Isa 9:6 probably envisions a similar kind of response when friends and foes alike look at the Davidic king in full battle regalia. When the king’s enemies oppose him on the battlefield, they are, as it were, fighting against God himself. The other option is to regard this title as a reference to God, confronting Isaiah’s readers with the divinity of this promised “child.” The use of this same title that clearly refers to God in a later passage (Isa 10:21) supports this interpretation. Other passages depict Yahweh as the great God and great warrior (Deut 10:17; Jer. 32:18). Although this connection of a child who is born with deity is unparalleled in any earlier biblical texts, Isaiah’s use of this title to make this connection represents Isaiah’s attempt (at God’s behest) to advance Israel in their understanding of the ideal Davidic king for whom they long. -->

[`Messianic Bible Translations`](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Messianic_Bible_translations)
- Critical Text

    > For unto us a yeled is born, unto us ben is given; and the misrah (dominion) shall be upon his shoulder; and Shmo shall be called Peleh (Wonderful), Yoetz (Counsellor), **El Gibbor (Mighty G-d), Avi Ad (Possessor of Eternity)**, Sar Shalom (Prince of Peace). &mdash; Isaiah 9:6 OJB (Orthodox Jewish Bible)

<!-- > Of the increase of His government and shalom there will be no end— on the throne of David and over His kingdom— to establish it and uphold it through justice and righteousness from now until forevermore. The zeal of Adonai-Tzva’ot will accomplish this. &mdash; Isaiah 9:6 TLV (Tree of Life Version, Formal Equivalent)

> in order to extend the dominion and perpetuate the peace of the throne and kingdom of David, to secure it and sustain it through justice and righteousness henceforth and forever. The zeal of Adonai-Tzva’ot will accomplish this. &mdash; Isaiah 9:6 CJB (Complete Jewish Bible, Dynamic Equivalent) -->

`Highly Idiomatic Translation / Paraphrase`
- Critical Text
    > The people who walked in darkness have seen a great light. For those who lived in a land of deep shadows— light! sunbursts of light! You repopulated the nation, you expanded its joy. Oh, they’re so glad in your presence! Festival joy! The joy of a great celebration, sharing rich gifts and warm greetings. The abuse of oppressors and cruelty of tyrants— all their whips and clubs and curses— Is gone, done away with, a deliverance as surprising and sudden as Gideon’s old victory over Midian. The boots of all those invading troops, along with their shirts soaked with innocent blood, Will be piled in a heap and burned, a fire that will burn for days! For a child has been born—for us! the gift of a son—for us! He’ll take over the running of the world. His names will be: Amazing Counselor, **Strong God, Eternal Father**, Prince of Wholeness. His ruling authority will grow, and there’ll be no limits to the wholeness he brings. He’ll rule from the historic David throne over that promised kingdom. He’ll put that kingdom on a firm footing and keep it going With fair dealing and right living, beginning now and lasting always. The zeal of God-of-the-Angel-Armies will do all this. &mdash; Isaiah 9:6 MSG (The Message)

`Barnes' Notes (Commentaries)` 

- > The mighty God - Syriac, 'The mighty God of ages.' This is one, and but one out of many, of the instances in which the name God is applied to the Messiah; compare John 1:1; Romans 9:5; 1 John 5:20; John 20:28; 1 Timothy 3:16 NKJV; Hebrews 1:8. The name 'mighty God,' is unquestionably attributed to the true God in Isaiah 10:21. Much controversy has arisen in relation to this expression; and attempts have been made to show that the word translated "God," אל 'ĕl, may refer to a hero, a king, a conqueror. Thus Gesenius renders, it 'Mighty hero;' and supposes that the name 'God' is used here in accordance with the custom of the Orientals, who ascribe divine attributes to kings. In like manner Pluschke (see Hengstenberg) says, 'In my opinion this name is altogether symbolical. The Messiah shall be called strength of God, or strong God, divine hero, in order by this name to remind the people of the strength of God.' But after all such controversy, it still remains certain that the natural and obvious meaning of the expression is to denote a divine nature. So it was evidently understood by the ancient versions; and the fact that the name God is so often applied to Christ in the New Testament proves that it is to be understood in its natural and obvious signification.

## Conclusion

God the Father, in the Old Testament, is also called “Mighty God” in Isaiah 10:21, the same title that is ascribed to the Son of God, Jesus Christ. Remember that there is only ONE God (Is 43:10;44:8,24)! Do not let the cults deceive you.

> A remnant will return, the remnant of Jacob, to the **mighty God**. &mdash; Isaiah 10:21 LSB

<script>
	var refTagger = {
		settings: {
			bibleVersion: 'ESV'
		}
	}; 

	(function(d, t) {
		var n=d.querySelector('[nonce]');
		refTagger.settings.nonce = n && (n.nonce||n.getAttribute('nonce'));
		var g = d.createElement(t), s = d.getElementsByTagName(t)[0];
		g.src = 'https://api.reftagger.com/v2/RefTagger.js';
		g.nonce = refTagger.settings.nonce;
		s.parentNode.insertBefore(g, s);
	}(document, 'script'));
</script>