---
layout: post
title: "Defending Jesus Deity: The Jews Who Crucified Jesus Understood Him To Be Saying That He Was God ✝️"
date: 2022-08-09 13:52:19 -0600
categories: god jesus deity bible cults
published: true
---

## The Jews Who Crucified Jesus Understood Him To Be Saying That He Was God

`Formal Equivalence (Word-For-Word)`
- Received Text (Textus Receptus)

    > **I and my Father are one.** 31 Then the Jews took up stones again to stone him. 32 Jesus answered them, Many good works have I shewed you from my Father; for which of those works do ye stone me? 33 The Jews answered him, saying, For a good work we stone thee not; but for blasphemy; and **because that thou, being a man, makest thyself God.** &mdash; John 10:30-33 KJV (48.83% / 66.58%)

    > **I and My Father are one.”** 31 Then the Jews took up stones again to stone Him. 32 Jesus answered them, “Many good works I have shown you from My Father. For which of those works do you stone Me?” 33 The Jews answered Him, saying, “For a good work we do not stone You, but for blasphemy, and **because You, being a Man, make Yourself God.”** &mdash; John 10:30-33 NKJV (60.32% / 65.21%)

- Majority Text

    >  **I and the Father are one.”** 31 Therefore the Jews took up stones again to stone him. 32 Jesus answered them, “I have shown you many good works from my Father. For which of those works do you stone me?” 33 The Jews answered him, “We don’t stone you for a good work, but for blasphemy: **because you, being a man, make yourself God.”** &mdash; John 10:30-33 WEB (World English Bible)

- Critical Text

    > **I and the Father are one.”** 31 The Jews picked up stones again to stone Him. 32 Jesus answered them, “I showed you many good works from the Father; for which of them are you stoning Me?” 33 The Jews answered Him, “For a good work we do not stone You, but for blasphemy; and **because You, being a man, make Yourself God.”** &mdash; John 10:30-33 LSB (NASB '95 61.65% / 67.99%)

    > **I and the Father are one.”** 31 The Jews picked up stones again to stone him. 32 Jesus answered them, “I have shown you many good works from the Father; for which of them are you going to stone me?” 33 The Jews answered him, “It is not for a good work that we are going to stone you but for blasphemy, **because you, being a man, make yourself God.”** &mdash; John 10:30-33 ESV (62.36% / 68.74%)

`Dynamic Equivalence (Thought-For-Thought)`
- Critical Text

    > **The Father and I are one.”** 31 Once again the people picked up stones to kill him. 32 Jesus said, “At my Father’s direction I have done many good works. For which one are you going to stone me?” 33 They replied, “We’re stoning you not for any good work, but for blasphemy! **You, a mere man, claim to be God.”** &mdash; John 10:30-33 NLT (70.08% / 39.90%)

    > **I and the Father are one.**” 31 Again his Jewish opponents picked up stones to stone him, 32 but Jesus said to them, “I have shown you many good works from the Father. For which of these do you stone me?” 33 “We are not stoning you for any good work,” they replied, “but for blasphemy, **because you, a mere man, claim to be God.”** &mdash; John 10:30-33 NIV (67.20% / 53.10%)

    > **The Father and I**[a] **are one.”**[b] 31 The Jewish leaders[c] picked up rocks again to stone him to death. 32 Jesus said to them,[d] “I have shown you many good deeds[e] from the Father. For which one of them are you going to stone me?” 33 The Jewish leaders[f] replied,[g] “We are not going to stone you for a good deed[h] but for blasphemy,[i] **because**[j] **you, a man, are claiming to be God.”**[k] &mdash; John 10:30-33 NET (66.28% / 53.94%)

- NET Bible Translator Notes
    
    > b. John 10:30 tn The phrase ἕν ἐσμεν (hen esmen) is a significant assertion with trinitarian implications. ἕν is neuter, not masculine, so the assertion is not that Jesus and the Father are one person, but one “thing.” Identity of the two persons is not what is asserted, but essential unity (unity of essence).
    >
    i. John 10:33 sn This is the first time the official charge of blasphemy is voiced openly in the Fourth Gospel (although it was implicit in John 8:59). Blasphemy in the NT has a somewhat broader meaning than mere utterances. It could mean to say something that dishonored God, but it could also involve claims to divine prerogatives (in this case, Jesus’ claim to oneness with the Father, v. 30). Such claims were viewed as usurping God’s majesty or honor. The remark here raised directly the issue of the identity of Jesus himself as God’s representative.
    >
    j. John 10:33 tn Grk “and because.”
    >
    k. John 10:33 tn Grk “you, a man, make yourself to be God.”

[`Messianic Bible translations`](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Messianic_Bible_translations)
- Critical Text
    > **I and the Father are one.”** 31 Again the Judean leaders picked up stones to stone Him. 32 Yeshua answered them, “I’ve shown you many good works from the Father. For which of these are you going to stone Me?” 33 The Judean leaders answered, “We aren’t stoning you for a good work, but for blasphemy. **Though You are a man, You make Yourself God!”** &mdash; John 10:30-33 TLV (Tree of Life Version, Formal Equivalent)

    > **I and the Father are one.”** 31 Once again the Judeans picked up rocks in order to stone him. 32 Yeshua answered them, “You have seen me do many good deeds that reflect the Father’s power; for which one of these deeds are you stoning me?” 33 The Judeans replied, “We are not stoning you for any good deed, but for blasphemy — **because you, who are only a man, are making yourself out to be God** [a].” &mdash; John 10:30-33 CJB (Complete Jewish Bible, Dynamic Equivalent)

`Highly Idiomatic Translation / Paraphrase`
- Critical Text
    > 25-30 Jesus answered, “I told you, but you don’t believe. Everything I have done has been authorized by my Father, actions that speak louder than words. You don’t believe because you’re not my sheep. My sheep recognize my voice. I know them, and they follow me. I give them real and eternal life. They are protected from the Destroyer for good. No one can steal them from out of my hand. The Father who put them under my care is so much greater than the Destroyer and Thief. No one could ever get them away from him. I and the Father are one heart and mind.”
    >
    31-32 Again the Jews picked up rocks to throw at him. Jesus said, “I have made a present to you from the Father of a great many good actions. For which of these acts do you stone me?”
    >
    33 The Jews said, “We’re not stoning you for anything good you did, but for what you said—**this blasphemy of calling yourself God.”** &mdash; John 10:30-33 MSG (The Message)

## Conclusion

In accordance with Leviticus 24:16, The Jews tried to kill him for blasphemy! 

> Moreover, the one who **blasphemes** the name of Yahweh shall surely be put to death; **all the congregation shall certainly stone him**. The sojourner as well as the native, when he blasphemes the Name, shall be put to death. &mdash; Leviticus 24:16 LSB

It was understood that Jesus was claiming to be God, the Jews took it as blasphemy. This reaction only makes sense if Jesus was claiming to be God.

<!-- > ... but for blasphemy; and **because You, being a man, make Yourself God.” -->

> **I and the Father are one.”** 31 The Jews picked up stones again to stone Him. 32 Jesus answered them, “I showed you many good works from the Father; for which of them are you stoning Me?” 33 The Jews answered Him, **“For a good work we do not stone You, but for blasphemy; and because You, being a man, make Yourself God.”** &mdash; John 10:30-33 LSB (NASB '95 61.65% / 67.99%)

Further, this didn't happen just once, but many times.

> For this reason therefore **the Jews were seeking all the more to kill Him**, because He not only was breaking the Sabbath, but also was calling God His own Father, **making Himself equal with God.** &mdash; John 5:18 LSB

> **Your father Abraham rejoiced to see My day, and he saw it and was glad.”**
57 So the Jews said to Him, “You are not yet fifty years old, and have You seen Abraham?” 58 **Jesus said to them, “Truly, truly, I say to you, before Abraham was, I am.”** 59 **Therefore they picked up stones to throw at Him, but Jesus hid Himself and went out of the temple.** &mdash; John 8:56-59 LSB

<script>
	var refTagger = {
		settings: {
			bibleVersion: 'ESV'
		}
	}; 

	(function(d, t) {
		var n=d.querySelector('[nonce]');
		refTagger.settings.nonce = n && (n.nonce||n.getAttribute('nonce'));
		var g = d.createElement(t), s = d.getElementsByTagName(t)[0];
		g.src = 'https://api.reftagger.com/v2/RefTagger.js';
		g.nonce = refTagger.settings.nonce;
		s.parentNode.insertBefore(g, s);
	}(document, 'script'));
</script>