---
layout: post
title: "Defending Jesus Deity: The Blind Man Who Was Healed Worshiped Jesus As God ✝️"
date: 2022-08-15 18:32:15 -0500
categories: god jesus deity bible cults
published: true
---

## The Blind Man Who Was Healed Worshiped Jesus As God

Jesus never rebuked any Angel or any of His followers for worshiping Him and yet worship of anything or anyone other than God is absolutely forbidden in the Bible.

<!-- > And Jesus answered and said to him, **“It is written, ‘You shall worship the Lord your God and serve Him only.’”** &mdash; Luke 4:8 LSB -->

> And Jesus answered and said unto him, Get thee behind me, Satan: for it is written, Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and him only shalt thou serve. &mdash; Luke 4:8 KJV

<!-- > Then Jesus said to him, **“Go, Satan! For it is written, ‘You shall worship the Lord your God, and serve Him only.’”** &mdash; Matthew 4:10 LSB -->

> Then saith Jesus unto him, Get thee hence, Satan: for it is written, Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and him only shalt thou serve. &mdash; Matthew 4:10 KJV

`Formal Equivalence (Word-For-Word)`
- Received Text (Textus Receptus)

    > Jesus heard that they had cast him out; and when he had found him, he said unto him, Dost thou believe on the Son of God?
    >
    36 He answered and said, Who is he, Lord, that I might believe on him?
    >
    37 And Jesus said unto him, Thou hast both seen him, and it is he that talketh with thee.
    >
    38 And he said, Lord, I believe. And **he worshipped him.** &mdash; John 9:35-38 KJV (48.83% / 66.58%)

    --

    > Jesus heard that they had cast him out; and when He had found him, He said to him, “Do you believe in the Son of [a]God?”
    >
    36 He answered and said, “Who is He, Lord, that I may believe in Him?”
    >
    37 And Jesus said to him, “You have both seen Him and it is He who is talking with you.”
    >
    38 Then he said, “Lord, I believe!” And **he worshiped Him.** &mdash; John 9:35-38 NKJV (60.32% / 65.21%)

    --

    > Jesus heard that they had thrown him out, and when He found him, He said, “Do you believe in the Son of God?”
    >
    36 He answered, “Who is He, Lord, that I may believe in Him?”
    >
    37 Jesus said to him, “You have seen Him, and it is He who speaks with you.”
    >
    38 Then he said, “Lord, I believe.” And **he worshipped Him.** &mdash; John 9:35-38 MEV (Modern English Version)

- Majority Text

    > Jesus heard that they had thrown him out, and finding him, he said, “Do you believe in the Son of God?”
    >
    36 He answered, “Who is he, Lord, that I may believe in him?”
    >
    37 Jesus said to him, “You have both seen him, and it is he who speaks with you.”
    >
    38 He said, “Lord, I believe!” and **he worshiped him.** &mdash; John 9:35-38 WEB (World English Bible)

- Critical Text

    > Jesus heard that they had put him out, and after finding him, He said, “Do you believe in the Son of Man?”
    36 He answered and said, “Who is He, Lord, that I may believe in Him?”
    37 Jesus said to him, “You have both seen Him, and He is the one who is talking with you.”
    38 And he said, “Lord, I believe.” And **he worshiped Him.** &mdash; John 9:35-38 LSB (NASB '95 61.65% / 67.99%)

    --

    > Jesus heard that they had cast him out, and having found him he said, “Do you believe in the Son of Man?”[a] 36 He answered, “And who is he, sir, that I may believe in him?” 37 Jesus said to him, “You have seen him, and it is he who is speaking to you.” 38 He said, “Lord, I believe,” and **he worshiped him.** &mdash; John 9:35-38 ESV (62.36% / 68.74%)

`Dynamic Equivalence (Thought-For-Thought)`
- Critical Text

    > When Jesus heard what had happened, he found the man and asked, “Do you believe in the Son of Man?[a]”
    >
    36 The man answered, “Who is he, sir? I want to believe in him.”
    >
    37 “You have seen him,” Jesus said, “and he is speaking to you!”
    >
    38 “Yes, Lord, I believe!” the man said. And **he worshiped Jesus.** &mdash; John 9:35-38 NLT (70.08% / 39.90%) 9:35 Some manuscripts read the Son of God? “Son of Man” is a title Jesus used for himself.

    --

    > Jesus heard that they had thrown him out, and when he found him, he said, “Do you believe in the Son of Man?”
    >
    36 “Who is he, sir?” the man asked. “Tell me so that I may believe in him.”
    >
    37 Jesus said, “You have now seen him; in fact, he is the one speaking with you.”
    >
    38 Then the man said, “Lord, I believe,” and **he worshiped him.** &mdash; John 9:35-38 NIV (67.20% / 53.10%)

    --

    > Jesus heard that they had thrown him out, so he found the man[a] and said to him, “Do you believe in the Son of Man?”[b] 36 The man[c] replied,[d] “And who is he, sir, that[e] I may believe in him?” 37 Jesus told him, “You have seen him; he[f] is the one speaking with you.”[g] 38 [He said, “Lord, I believe,” and **he worshiped him.**[h] &mdash; John 9:35-38 NET (66.28% / 53.94%)

- NET Bible Translator Notes
    
    > a. John 9:35 NET tn Grk “found him”; the referent (the man) has been specified in the translation for clarity.
    >
    b. John 9:35 NET tc Although most witnesses (A L Θ Ψ 070 0250 ƒ1,13 33 M lat) have θεοῦ (theou, “of God”) instead of ἀνθρώπου (anthrōpou, “of man”) here, the better witnesses (P66,75 א B D W sys) have ἀνθρώπου. Not only is the external evidence decidedly on the side of ἀνθρώπου, but it is difficult to see such early and diverse witnesses changing θεοῦ to ἀνθρώπου. The wording “Son of Man” is thus virtually certain.
    >
    c. John 9:36 NET tn Grk “That one.”
    >
    d. John 9:36 NET tn Grk answered and said.” This has been simplified in the translation to “replied.”
    >
    e. John 9:36 NET tn Or “And who is he, sir? Tell me so that…” Some translations supply elliptical words like “Tell me” (NIV, NRSV) following the man’s initial question, but the shorter form given in the translation is clear enough.
    >
    f. John 9:37 NET tn Grk “that one.”
    >
    g. John 9:37 NET tn The καί—καί (kai—kai) construction would normally be translated “both—and”: “You have both seen him, and he is the one speaking with you.” In this instance the English semicolon was used instead because it produces a smoother and more emphatic effect in English.
    >
    h. John 9:38 NET sn Assuming the authenticity of John 9:38-39a (see the tc note following the bracket in v. 39), the man’s response after Jesus’ statement of v. 37 is extremely significant: He worshiped Jesus. In the Johannine context the word would connote its full sense: This was something due God alone. Note also that Jesus did not prevent the man from doing this. The verb προσκυνέω (proskuneō) is used in John 4:20-25 of worshiping God, and again with the same sense in 12:20. This would be the only place in John’s Gospel where anyone is said to have worshiped Jesus using this term. As such, it forms the climax of the story of the man born blind, but the uniqueness of the concept of worshiping Jesus at this point in John’s narrative (which reaches its ultimate climax in the confession of Thomas in John 20:28) may suggest it is too early for such a response and it represents a later scribal addition.

[`Messianic Bible translations`](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Messianic_Bible_translations)
- Critical Text
    > Yeshua heard that they had thrown him out. Finding him, He said, “Do you believe in the Son of Man?”[a]
    >
    36 The man answered, “Who is He, Sir? Tell me, so that I may believe in Him!”
    >
    37 Yeshua said, “You have seen Him—He is the One speaking with you.”
    >
    38 He said, “Lord, I believe!” And **he worshiped Him.** &mdash; John 9:35-38 TLV (Tree of Life Version, Formal Equivalent)

    --

    > Yeshua heard that they had thrown the man out. He found him and said, “Do you trust in the Son of Man?” 36 “Sir,” he answered, “tell me who he is, so that I can trust in him.” 37 Yeshua said to him, “You have seen him. In fact, he’s the one speaking with you now.” 38 “Lord, I trust!” he said, and **he kneeled down in front of him.** &mdash; John 9:35-38 CJB (Complete Jewish Bible, Dynamic Equivalent)

`Highly Idiomatic Translation / Paraphrase`
- Critical Text
    > Jesus heard that they had thrown him out, and went and found him. He asked him, “Do you believe in the Son of Man?”
    >
    36 The man said, “Point him out to me, sir, so that I can believe in him.”
    >
    37 Jesus said, “You’re looking right at him. Don’t you recognize my voice?”
    >
    38 “Master, I believe,” the man said, **and worshiped him.** &mdash; John 9:35-38 MSG (The Message)

## Conclusion

Jesus receives worship! And God only is to receive worship Luke 4:8; Matthew 4:10. Jesus is God!

<script>
	var refTagger = {
		settings: {
			bibleVersion: 'ESV'
		}
	}; 

	(function(d, t) {
		var n=d.querySelector('[nonce]');
		refTagger.settings.nonce = n && (n.nonce||n.getAttribute('nonce'));
		var g = d.createElement(t), s = d.getElementsByTagName(t)[0];
		g.src = 'https://api.reftagger.com/v2/RefTagger.js';
		g.nonce = refTagger.settings.nonce;
		s.parentNode.insertBefore(g, s);
	}(document, 'script'));
</script>