---
layout: post
title: "God Created What Science Seeks To Understand 🧬"
date: 2022-05-10 00:02:07 -0700
categories: god bible religion
published: true
---

## God Created What Science Seeks To Understand

According to 100 Years of Nobel Prize (2005), a review of Nobel prizes awarded between 1901 and 2000, 65.4% of Nobel Prize Laureates have identified Christianity as their religious preference (427 prizes). Overall, Christians have won a total of 78.3% of all the Nobel Prizes in Peace, 72.5% in Chemistry, 65.3% in Physics, 62% in Medicine.

# Sir Isaac Newton 
<!-- (4 January 1643 to 31 March 1727) -->

[The greatest scientific mind the world has ever produced](https://youtu.be/bUmULlGACEI?t=430), responsible for the ***The First Great Unification in physics, and the invention of Calculus*** independently from Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz. Philosophiæ Naturalis Principia Mathematica is considered one of the most important works in the history of science. Newton was a devout Christian.

>"God created everything by number, weight and measure."
>
"In the absence of any other proof, the thumb alone would convince me of God’s existence."
>
"I have a fundamental belief in the Bible as the Word of God, written by those who were inspired. I study the Bible daily."
>
"This most beautiful system of the sun, planets, and comets, could only proceed from the counsel and dominion of an intelligent and powerful Being....This Being governs all things, not as the soul of the world, but as Lord over all; and on account of his dominion he is wont to be called Lord God "pantokrator," or Universal Ruler" (as cited in Principia Mathematica, which is widely regarded to be the most important scientific work of all time.)

# Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz
<!-- 1 July 1646 to 14 November 1716 -->

Created calculus [autodidactically](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_autodidacts) and independently from Newton, and paved the way for Einstein’s theory of relativity. Einstein, who called himself a “Leibnizian” even wrote that Leibnizianism was superior to Newtonianism, and his ideas would have dominated over Newton’s had it not been for the poor technological tools of the time. 

> We never have a full demonstration, although there is always an underlying reason for the truth, even if it is only perfectly understood by God, who alone penetrated the infinite series in one stroke of the mind. &mdash; The Shorter Leibniz Texts (2006) edited by Lloyd H. Strickland, p. 111

> Every substance is as a world apart, independent of everything else except God. &mdash; Discours de métaphysique (1686)

> In whatever manner God created the world, it would always have been regular and in a certain general order. God, however, has chosen the most perfect, that is to say, the one which is at the same time the simplest in hypothesis and the richest in phenomena. &mdash; Discours de métaphysique (1686)

> If there were no best among all possible worlds, God would not have created one. &mdash; Théodicée (1710)ː I. 8

> The love of God consists in an ardent desire to procure the general welfare, and reason teaches me that there is nothing which contributes more to the general welfare of mankind than the perfection of reason. &mdash; Closing sentence of the Preface to the general science (1677) (in P. Wiener (ed.), Leibniz Selections, Macmilland Press Ltd, 1951).

> Now, as there is an infinity of possible universes in the Ideas of God, and as only one of them can exist, there must be a sufficient reason for God's choice, which determines him toward one rather than another. And this reason can be found only in the fitness, or the degrees of perfection, that these worlds contain, since each possible thing has the right to claim existence in proportion to the perfection it involves. &mdash; La monadologie (53 & 54).

> Perhaps never has a man read as much, studied as much, meditated more, and written more than Leibniz… What he has composed on the world, God, nature, and the soul is of the most sublime eloquence. If his ideas had been expressed with the flair of Plato, the philosopher of Leipzig would cede nothing to the philosopher of Athens. &mdash; Denis Diderot, Oeuvres complètes, vol. 7, p. 709, quoted in "Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz" (2013) by Brandon C. Look

> It was thus that Leibnitz saw in his binary arithmetic the image of creation. He imagined that Unity represented God, and Zero the void; and that the Supreme Being drew all beings from the void, just as unity and zero express all numbers in this system of numeration. &mdash; Pierre-Simon Laplace, Essai Philosophique sur les Probabilitésas (1814) p. 82, partially quoted in Tobias Dantzig, Number: The Language of Science (1930) p. 15 and in Richard Courant, Herbert Robbins What is Mathematics? (1941) revised by Ian Stewart (1996)

<!-- Leibniz famously tried to show that ours is the best of all possible worlds (see also Monadologie (53 & 54) below and compare Maimonides from Guide for the Perplexed (c. 1190), "Whatever is formed of matter receives the most perfect form possible in that species of matter.") These attempts were mercilessly parodied in Voltaire's Candide. Quotations from Voltaire's novel are often mistakenly attributed to Leibniz. Other statements by Leibniz upon the subject include these: -->


# Michael Faraday
<!-- 22 September 1791 to 25 August 1867 -->

The greatest self-taught experimental physicist, and one of the most influential scientists in history. Albert Einstein kept a picture of Michael Faraday on his study wall, alongside pictures of Isaac Newton and James Clerk Maxwell at his apartment in Berlin, Germany.

> The book of nature which we have to read is written by the finger of God. — Michael Faraday

> Since peace is alone in the gift of God; and since it is He who gives it, why should we be afraid? His unspeakable gift in His beloved Son is the ground of no doubtful hope. — Michael Faraday

> "Faraday found no conflict between his religious beliefs and his activities as a scientist and philosopher. He viewed his discoveries of nature's laws as part of the continual process of "reading the book of nature", no different in principle from the process of reading the Bible to discover God's laws. A strong sense of the unity of God and nature pervaded Faraday's life and work." &mdash; Jim Baggot, in "The myth of Michael Faraday: Michael Faraday was not just one of Britain's greatest experimenters. A closer look at the man and his work reveals that he was also a clever theoretician" in New Scientist No. 1787 (21 September 1991)

# James Clerk Maxwell
<!-- 13 June 1831 to 5 November 1879 -->

Physicist and mathematician, who is credited with formulating classical electromagnetic theory and whose contributions to science are considered to be of the same magnitude to those of Einstein and Newton. Maxwell was a devout Christian responsible for the ***The Second Great Unification in physics***. When Einstein was asked if he stood on the shoulders of Newton, he replied “No, on the shoulders of Maxwell”

> “I have looked into most philosophical systems and I have seen that none will work without God.”
>
“Science is incompetent to reason upon the creation of matter itself out of nothing. We have reached the utmost limit of our thinking faculties when we have admitted that because matter cannot be eternal and self-existent it must have been created.”

> "Man's chief end is to glorify God and to enjoy him for ever." &mdash; Quotations from The Life of James Clerk Maxwell (1882) by Lewis Campbell and William Garnett

> I think men of science as well as other men need to learn from Christ, and I think Christians whose minds are scientific are bound to study science that their view of the glory of God may be as extensive as their being is capable. &mdash; Draft of a reply to an invitation to join the Victoria Institute (1875), in Ch. 12 : Cambridge 1871 To 1879, p. 404

> ... I have the capacity of being more wicked than any example that man could set me, and ... if I escape, it is only by God's grace helping me to get rid of myself, partially in science, more completely in society, —but not perfectly except by committing myself to God ...&mdash; Letter to Rev. C. B. Tayler ( 8 July 1853) in Ch. 6 : Undergraduate Life At Cambridge October 1850 to January 1854 — ÆT. 19-22, p. 189

> Christianity—that is, the religion of the Bible—is the only scheme or form of belief which disavows any possessions on such a tenure. Here alone all is free. You may fly to the ends of the world and find no God but the Author of Salvation. You may search the Scriptures and not find a text to stop you in your explorations. ... &mdash; "James Clerk Maxwell and the Christian Proposition". MIT IAP Seminar. Archived from the original on 25 October 2014. Retrieved 13 October 2014.

> "I have been thinking how very gently I have always been dealt with. I have never had a violent shove all my life. The only desire which I can have is like David to serve my own generation by the will of God, and then fall asleep." &mdash; As death approached Maxwell told a Cambridge colleague, "James Clerk Maxwell and the Christian Proposition". MIT IAP Seminar. Archived from the original on 25 October 2014. Retrieved 13 October 2014.


# Nikola Tesla 
<!-- 10 July 1856 to 7 January 1943 -->

The inventor and futurist scientist known for numerous inventions, but best known for his contributions to the design of the modern alternating current (AC) electrical supply system. Tesla was the winner of: Edison Medal (1916); Elliott Cresson Medal (1894); John Scott Medal (1934)

> “The gift of mental power comes from God, Divine Being, and if we concentrate our minds on that truth, we become in tune with this great power.”

# Albert Einstein 
<!-- 14 March 1879 to 18 April 1955 -->

Einstein’s theory of general relativity comprises the finalization of Newton’s assumption of gravitation and further encompasses Mach’s vision of the relativity of all motion; his theory of special relativity incorporates the finalization of the work of Maxwell and Lorentz. While Einstein didn't believe in a personal God, he did believe in a God. Einstein (called himself a “Leibnizian,” and was also a Spinozist)

> "The more I study science, the more I believe in God."
>
"The fanatical atheists are like slaves who are still feeling the weight of their chains which they have thrown off after hard struggle. They are creatures who – in their grudge against traditional religion as the ‘opium of the masses’ – cannot hear the music of the spheres."
>
“I’m not an atheist, and I don’t think I can call myself a pantheist. We are in the position of a little child entering a huge library filled with books in many languages. The child knows someone must have written those books. It does not know how. It does not understand the languages in which they are written. The child dimly suspects a mysterious order in the books but doesn’t know what it is. That, it seems to me, is the attitude of even the most intelligent human being toward God.” (Albert Einstein, as cited in Antony Flew’s book, There Is A God: How the World’s Most Notorious Atheist Changed His Mind.)
>
"I want to know how God created this world. I am not interested in this or that phenomenon, in the spectrum of this or that element. I want to know his thoughts; the rest are details."
>
“As a child I received instruction both in the Bible and in the Talmud. I am a Jew, but I am enthralled by the luminous figure of the Nazarene . . . . No one can read the Gospels without feeling the actual presence of Jesus. His personality pulsates in every word. No myth is filled with such life. Jesus is too colossal for the pen of phrase-mongers, however artful. No man can dispose of Christianity with a bon mot.” (Albert Einstein, as cited in “What Life Means to Einstein,” The Saturday Evening Post, October 26, 1929.)
>
“Everyone who is seriously involved in the pursuit of science becomes convinced that a spirit is manifest in the laws of the Universe–a spirit vastly superior to that of man, and one in the face of which we with our modest powers must feel humble.”
>
“In view of such harmony in the cosmos which I, with my limited human mind, am able to recognize, there are yet people who say there is no God. But what really makes me angry is that they quote me for the support of such views.” (Clark, Ronald W. (1971). Einstein: The Life and Times. New York: World Publishing Company)

# Kurt Friedrich Gödel
<!-- April 28, 1906 to January 14, 1978 -->

The Greatest Logician & Analytic Philosopher, Kurt Gödel’s astonishing discovery and proof, published in 1931, that even in elementary parts of arithmetic there exist propositions which cannot be proved or disproved within the system, is one of the most important contributions to logic since Aristotle. Gödel was a Christian. He believed that God was personal, and called his philosophy "rationalistic, idealistic, optimistic, and theological"

> "My theory is rationalistic, idealistic, optimistic, and theological” — Kurt Friedrich Gödel

> Gödel believed firmly in an afterlife, saying, "Of course this supposes that there are many relationships which today's science and received wisdom haven't any inkling of. But I am convinced of this [the afterlife], independently of any theology." It is "possible today to perceive, by pure reasoning" that it "is entirely consistent with known facts." "If the world is rationally constructed and has meaning, then there must be such a thing [as an afterlife]."

> In an unmailed answer to a questionnaire, Gödel described his religion as "baptized Lutheran (but not member of any religious congregation). My belief is theistic, not pantheistic, following Leibniz rather than Spinoza." Of religion(s) in general, he said: "Religions are, for the most part, bad—but religion is not". According to his wife Adele, "Gödel, although he did not go to church, was religious and read the Bible in bed every Sunday morning".

# Max Planck 

The Nobel Prize winning physicist who made the crucial scientific contribution of founding quantum physics. Planck was a Christian and a member of the Lutheran Church in Germany.

Religion and Natural Science (Lecture Given 1937) Scientific Autobiography and Other Papers, trans. F. Gaynor (New York, 1949), pp. 184

> “Both religion and science require a belief in God. For believers, God is in the beginning, and for physicists He is at the end of all considerations… To the former He is the foundation, to the latter, the crown of the edifice of every generalized world view.”
>
“There can never be any real opposition between religion and science; for the one is the complement of the other. Every serious and reflective person realizes, I think, that the religious element in his nature must be recognized and cultivated if all the powers of the human soul are to act together in perfect balance and harmony. And indeed it was not by accident that the greatest thinkers of all ages were deeply religious souls.”

# Erwin Schrödinger 

Winner of the 1933 Nobel Prize in Physics “for the discovery of new productive forms of atomic theory.”

> “Science is a game – but a game with reality, a game with sharpened knives. If a man cuts a picture carefully into 1000 pieces, you solve the puzzle when you reassemble the pieces into a picture; in the success or failure, both your intelligences compete. In the presentation of a scientific problem, the other player is the good Lord. He has not only set the problem but also has devised the rules of the game – but they are not completely known, half of them are left for you to discover or to deduce. The uncertainty is how many of the rules God himself has permanently ordained, and how many apparently are caused by your own mental inertia, while the solution generally becomes possible only through freedom from its limitations. This is perhaps the most exciting thing in the game.”

# Werner von Braun 

The father of space science and the most important rocket scientist involved in the development of the U.S. space program.

> “The vast mysteries of the universe should only confirm our belief in the certainty of its Creator. I find it as difficult to understand a scientist who does not acknowledge the presence of a superior rationality behind the existence of the universe as it is to comprehend a theologian who would deny the advances of science.”
>
“They (evolutionists) challenge science to prove the existence of God. But must we really light a candle to see the sun? They say they cannot visualize a Designer. Well, can a physicist visualize an electron? What strange rationale makes some physicists accept the inconceivable electron as real while refusing to accept the reality of a Designer on the grounds that they cannot conceive Him?”
>
“God deliberately reduced Himself to the stature of humanity in order to visit the earth in person, because the cumulative effect over the centuries of millions of individuals choosing to please themselves rather than God had infected the whole planet. When God became a man Himself, the experience proved to be nothing short of pure agony. In man’s time-honored fashion, they would unleash the whole arsenal of weapons against Him: **misrepresentation, slander, and accusation of treason**. The stage was set for a situation without parallel in the history of the earth. God would visit creatures and they would nail Him to the cross!”
>
“Although I know of no reference to Christ ever commenting on scientific work, I do know that He said, “Ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free.” Thus I am certain that, were He among us today, Christ would encourage scientific research as modern man’s most noble striving to comprehend and admire His Father’s handiwork. The universe as revealed through scientific inquiry is the living witness that God has indeed been at work.”

# Galileo Galilei

Astronomer, physicist, engineer, mathematician and philosopher who made fundamental contributions to the sciences of motion, astronomy, and strength of materials and to the development of the scientific method. His formulation of (circular) inertia, the law of falling bodies, and parabolic trajectories marked the beginning of a fundamental change in the study of motion. 

<!-- His insistence that the book of nature was written in the language of mathematics changed natural philosophy from a verbal, qualitative account to a mathematical one in which experimentation became a recognized method for discovering the facts of nature. Finally, his discoveries with the telescope revolutionized astronomy and paved the way for the acceptance of the Copernican heliocentric system, but his advocacy of that system eventually resulted in an Inquisition process against him. -->

> “Mathematics is the language in which God has written the universe”

> "I do not feel obliged to believe that the same God who has endowed us with senses, reason, and intellect has intended us to forgo their use ..." &mdash; Letter to the Grand Duchess Christina (1615)

> Nature … is inexorable and immutable; she never transgresses the laws imposed upon her, or cares a whit whether her abstruse reasons and methods of operation are understandable to men. For that reason it appears that nothing physical which sense-experience sets before our eyes, or which necessary demonstrations prove to us, ought to be called in question (much less condemned) upon the testimony of biblical passages which may have some different meaning beneath their words. For the Bible is not chained in every expression to conditions as strict as those which govern all physical effects; nor is God any less excellently revealed in Nature's actions than in the sacred statements of the Bible. &mdash; Letter to the Grand Duchess Christina (1615)

<!-- Essay published in 1615, in response to enquiries of Christina of Tuscany, as quoted in Aspects of Western Civilization : Problems and Sources in History (1988) by Perry McAdow Rogers, p. 53 -->

> Surely, God could have caused birds to fly with their bones made of solid gold, with their veins full of quicksilver, with their flesh heavier than lead, and with their wings exceedingly small. He did not, and that ought to show something. It is only in order to shield your ignorance that you put the Lord at every turn to the refuge of a miracle. &mdash; Notes in a copy of Jean-Baptiste Morin's "Famous and ancient problems of the earth's motion or rest, yet to be solved" (published 1631), as quoted in The Crime of Galileo (1976) by Giorgio De Santillana, p. 167

> "... So help me God, and these His Holy Gospels, which I touch with my hands." &mdash; Recantation (22 June 1633) as quoted in The Crime of Galileo (1955) by Giorgio de Santillana, p. 312.

> Philosophy is written in this grand book, which stands continually open before our eyes (I say the 'Universe'), but can not be understood without first learning to comprehend the language and know the characters as it is written. It is written in mathematical language, and its characters are triangles, circles and other geometric figures, without which it is impossible to humanly understand a word; without these one is wandering in a dark labyrinth. &mdash; Il Saggiatore, 1623

<!-- > Philosophy is written in that great book which ever lies before our eyes, I mean the universe, but we cannot understand it if we do not first learn the language and grasp the symbols, in which it is written. This book is written in the mathematical language, and the symbols are triangles, circles and other geometrical figures, without whose help it is impossible to comprehend a single word of it; without which one wanders in vain through a dark labyrinth. &mdash; The Assayer (1623), as translated by Thomas Salusbury (1661), p. 178, as quoted in The Metaphysical Foundations of Modern Science (2003) by Edwin Arthur Burtt, p. 75. -->

<!-- > Philosophy is written in this grand book — I mean the universe — which stands continually open to our gaze, but it cannot be understood unless one first learns to comprehend the language in which it is written. It is written in the language of mathematics, and its characters are triangles, circles, and other geometric figures, without which it is humanly impossible to understand a single word of it; without these, one is wandering about in a dark labyrinth. &mdash; As translated in The Philosophy of the Sixteenth and Seventeenth Centuries (1966) by Richard Henry Popkin, p. 65 -->

> To give us the science of motion God and Nature have joined hands and created the intellect of Galileo. &mdash; Paolo Sarpi, Editor's Preface to Dialogues and Mathematical Demonstrations Concerning Two New Sciences by Galileo (1638) Crew and De Salvio translation (1914)


# Nicolaus Copernicus 

The mathematician and astronomer (1473-1543) who formulated a heliocentric model of the universe, as cited in The Language of God by Francis Collins. (“Heliocentric” places the sun, rather than the Earth, at the center of the universe).

> “To know the mighty works of God, to comprehend His wisdom and majesty and power; to appreciate, in degree, the wonderful workings of His laws, surely all this must be a pleasing and acceptable mode of worship to the Most High, to whom ignorance cannot be more grateful than knowledge.”

# Lord William Kelvin 

Who was noted for his theoretical work on thermodynamics, the concept of absolute zero and the Kelvin temperature scale based upon it. Kelvin was a devout Christian.

> “I believe that the more thoroughly science is studied, the further does it take us from anything comparable to atheism.”
>
“If you study science deep enough and long enough, it will force you to believe in God.”

# Louis Pasteur 

The founder of microbiology and immunology. Pasteur was a devout Christian.

> “The more I study nature, the more I stand amazed at the work of the Creator. Science brings men nearer to God.”
>
“In good philosophy, the word cause ought to be reserved to the single Divine impulse that has formed the universe.”
>
“Little science takes you away from God but more of it takes you to Him.”

# Sir Francis Bacon 

The 17th century scientist and philosopher of science who is credited with discovering and popularizing the scientific method, whereby the laws of science are discovered by gathering and analyzing data from experiments and observations. Bacon was a devout Christian.

> ”A little science estranges a man from God. A lot of science brings him back.”

# Charles Darwin 

> “Another source of conviction in the existence of God, connected with the reason and not with the feelings, impresses me as having much more weight. This follows from the extreme difficulty or rather impossibility of conceiving this immense and wonderful universe, including man with his capacity of looking far backwards and far into futurity, as the result of blind chance or necessity. When thus reflecting I feel compelled to look to a First Cause having an intelligent mind in some degree analogous to that of man; and I deserve to be called a Theist.”
&mdash; Charles Darwin, the founder of evolutionary biology, as quoted in his autobiography.
>
"The question of whether there exists a Creator and Ruler of the Universe has been answered in the affirmative by some of the highest intellects that have ever existed."
&mdash; Charles Darwin, the founder of evolutionary biology, as cited in his book Descent of Man.
>
"To suppose that the eye with all its inimitable contrivances for adjusting the focus to different distances, 
for admitting different amounts of light, and for the correction of spherical and chromatic aberration, 
could have been formed by natural selection, seems, I confess, absurd in the highest degree...
The difficulty of believing that a perfect and complex eye could be formed by natural selection, 
though insuperable by our imagination, should not be considered subversive of the theory."
&mdash; Charles Darwin
>
"If it could be demonstrated that any complex organ existed which could not possibly have been formed by numerous, 
successive, slight modifications, my theory would absolutely break down."
&mdash; Origin of Species

# Ernst Boris Chain 
<!-- (1906-1979),  -->

Winner of the 1945 Nobel Prize in Medicine and Physiology

> "To postulate, as the positivists of the end of the 19th century and their followers here have done, 
that the development and survival of the fittest is entirely a consequence of chance mutations, 
or even that nature carries out experiments by trial and error through mutations in order to create living systems better fitted to survive, 
seems to me a hypothesis based on no evidence and irreconcilable with the facts."

# Dr. Michio Kaku, Professor of theoretical physics

Theoretical physicist and string theory pioneer. 

> “I have concluded that we are in a world made by rules created by an intelligence. Believe me, everything that we call chance today won’t make sense anymore. To me it is clear that we exist in a plan which is governed by rules that were created, shaped by a universal intelligence and not by chance.”

> "Physics says nothing about where the laws of physics themselves come from. So the cosmological proof of Saint Thomas Aquinas concerning the First Mover or First Cause is left relevant even today." &mdash; The God Equation

# Joseph H. Taylor, Jr. 

Received the 1993 Nobel Prize in Physics for the discovery of the first known binary pulsar, and for his work which supported the Big Bang theory of the creation of the universe. Taylor is a devout Christian.

> “A scientific discovery is also a religious discovery. There is no conflict between science and religion. Our knowledge of God is made larger with every discovery we make about the world.”

# Robert Andrews Millikan 

who won the 1923 Nobel Prize in Physics for his work on the elementary charge of electricity and on the photoelectric effect. Millikan was a devout Christian.

> “To me it is unthinkable that a real atheist could be a scientist.”

# Vera Kistiakowsky, MIT physicist

> “The exquisite order displayed by our scientific understanding of the physical world calls for the divine.”