---
layout: post
title: "Defending Jesus Deity: Jesus Is God Because They Pierced Yahweh On The Cross! ✝️"
date: 2022-08-11 16:09:06 -0500
categories: god jesus deity bible cults
published: true
---

## Jesus Is God Because They Pierced Yahweh On The Cross!

`Formal Equivalence (Word-For-Word)`
- Received Text (Textus Receptus)

    > And I will pour upon the house of David, and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the spirit of grace and of supplications: **and they shall look upon <span style="font-size:23px;">me</span> whom they have pierced,** and they shall mourn for him, as one mourneth for his only son, and shall be in bitterness for him, as one that is in bitterness for his firstborn. &mdash; Zechariah 12:10 KJV (48.83% / 66.58%)

    > “And I will pour on the house of David and on the inhabitants of Jerusalem the Spirit of grace and supplication; **then they will look on <span style="font-size:23px;">Me</span> whom they pierced.** Yes, they will mourn for Him as one mourns for his only son, and grieve for Him as one grieves for a firstborn. &mdash; Zechariah 12:10 NKJV (60.32% / 65.21%)

    > And I will pour out on the house of David and over those dwelling in Jerusalem a spirit of favor and supplication so that **they look to <span style="font-size:23px;">Me</span>, whom they have pierced through.** And they will mourn over him as one mourns for an only child and weep bitterly over him as a firstborn. &mdash; Zechariah 12:10 MEV (Modern English Version)

- Majority Text

    > I will pour on David’s house, and on the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the spirit of grace and of supplication; and **they will look to <span style="font-size:23px;">me</span> whom they have pierced;** and they shall mourn for him, as one mourns for his only son, and will grieve bitterly for him, as one grieves for his firstborn. &mdash; Zechariah 12:10 WEB (World English Bible)

- Critical Text

    > “And I will pour out on the house of David and on the inhabitants of Jerusalem the Spirit of grace and of supplication, so that **they will look on <span style="font-size:23px;">Me</span> whom they have pierced;** and they will mourn for Him, as one mourns for an only son, and they will weep bitterly over Him like the bitter weeping over a firstborn. &mdash; Zechariah 12:10 LSB (NASB '95 61.65% / 67.99%)

    > “And I will pour out on the house of David and the inhabitants of Jerusalem a spirit of grace and pleas for mercy, so that, when **they look on <span style="font-size:23px;">me</span>, on him whom they have pierced,** they shall mourn for him, as one mourns for an only child, and weep bitterly over him, as one weeps over a firstborn. &mdash; Zechariah 12:10 ESV (62.36% / 68.74%)

`Dynamic Equivalence (Thought-For-Thought)`
- Critical Text

    > “Then I will pour out a spirit of grace and prayer on the family of David and on the people of Jerusalem. **They will look on <span style="font-size:23px;">me</span> whom they have pierced** and mourn for him as for an only son. They will grieve bitterly for him as for a firstborn son who has died. &mdash; Zechariah 12:10 NLT (70.08% / 39.90%)

    > “And I will pour out on the house of David and the inhabitants of Jerusalem a spirit of grace and supplication. **They will look on <span style="font-size:23px;">me</span>, the one they have pierced,** and they will mourn for him as one mourns for an only child, and grieve bitterly for him as one grieves for a firstborn son. &mdash; Zechariah 12:10 NIV (67.20% / 53.10%)

    > “I will pour out on the kingship[a] of David and the population of Jerusalem a spirit of grace and supplication so that **they will look to <span style="font-size:23px;">me</span>,[b] the one they have pierced.** They will lament for him as one laments for an only son, and there will be a bitter cry for him like the bitter cry for a firstborn.[c] &mdash; Zechariah 12:10 NET (66.28% / 53.94%)

- NET Bible Translator Notes
    
    > b. Zechariah 12:10 tc Because of the difficulty of the concept of the mortal piercing of God, the subject of this clause, and the shift of pronoun from “me” to “him” in the next, some mss read אֶל אֵת אֲשֶׁר or אֱלֵי אֵת אֲשֶׁר (ʾel ʾet ʾasher or ʾele ʾet ʾasher, “to the one whom,” a reading followed by NAB, NRSV) rather than the MT’s אֵלַי אֵת אֲשֶׁר (ʾelay ʾet ʾasher, “to me whom”). The reasons for such alternatives, however, are clear—they are motivated by scribes who found such statements theologically objectionable—and they should be rejected in favor of the more difficult reading (lectio difficilior) of the MT.tn Or “on me.”
	>
	c. Zechariah 12:10 tn The Hebrew term בְּכוֹר (bekhor, “firstborn”), translated usually in the LXX by πρωτότοκος (prōtotokos), has **unmistakable messianic overtones** as the use of the Greek term in the NT to describe Jesus makes clear (cf. Col 1:15, 18). Thus, the idea of God being pierced sets the stage for the fatal wounding of **Jesus**, the Messiah and the Son of God (cf. John 19:37; Rev 1:7). Note that some English translations supply “son” from the context (e.g., NIV, TEV, NLT).

[`Messianic Bible translations`](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Messianic_Bible_translations)
- Critical Text
    > “Then I will pour out on the house of David and the inhabitants of Jerusalem a spirit of grace and supplication, when **they will look toward <span style="font-size:23px;">Me</span> whom they pierced.** They will mourn for him as one mourns for an only son and grieve bitterly for him, as one grieves for a firstborn. &mdash; Zechariah 12:10 TLV (Tree of Life Version, Formal Equivalent)

    > and I will pour out on the house of David and on those living in Yerushalayim a spirit of grace and prayer; and **they will look to <span style="font-size:23px;">me</span>, whom they pierced.”** They will mourn for him as one mourns for an only son; they will be in bitterness on his behalf like the bitterness for a firstborn son. &mdash; Zechariah 12:10 CJB (Complete Jewish Bible, Dynamic Equivalent)

	> And I will pour upon the Bais Dovid, and upon the inhabitants of Yerushalayim, the Ruach (Spirit) of Chen (grace) and of Tachanunim (supplications for favor); and **they shall look upon <span style="font-size:23px;">Me</span> whom they have pierced [dakar, "pierce through" cf. Yeshayah 53:5; Targum HaShivim Tehillim 22:17],** and they shall mourn for Him (Moshiach) as one mourneth for his yachid (only son), and shall grieve in bitterness for him, as one that is in bitterness for his bechor (firstborn). &mdash; Zechariah 12:10 OJB (Orthodox Jewish Bible)

`Highly Idiomatic Translation / Paraphrase`
- Critical Text
    > 10-14 “Next I’ll deal with the family of David and those who live in Jerusalem. I’ll pour a spirit of grace and prayer over them. **They’ll then be able to recognize <span style="font-size:23px;">me</span> as the One they so grievously wounded—that piercing spear-thrust!** And they’ll weep—oh, how they’ll weep! Deep mourning as of a parent grieving the loss of the firstborn child. The lamentation in Jerusalem that day will be massive, as famous as the lamentation over Hadad-Rimmon on the fields of Megiddo:
	>
    Everyone will weep and grieve,
        the land and everyone in it:
    The family of David off by itself
        and their women off by themselves;
    The family of Nathan off by itself
        and their women off by themselves;
    The family of Levi off by itself
        and their women off by themselves;
    The family of Shimei off by itself
        and their women off by themselves;
    And all the rest of the families off by themselves
        and their women off by themselves.” &mdash; Zechariah 12:10-14 MSG (The Message)

## Conclusion

The very first verse in Zec 12:1 reveals that Yahweh is the one who is talking. Verses 2 through 12 are a single discourse tied to the “Thus declares the LORD [Yahweh]” in verse 1.

> The oracle of the word of **Yahweh** concerning Israel. **Thus declares Yahweh** who stretches out the heavens, lays the foundation of the earth, and forms the spirit of man within him, &mdash; Zechariah 12:10 LSB (NASB '95 61.65% / 67.99%)

The point is driven home in Revelation 1:7.

> “And I will pour out on the house of David and on the inhabitants of Jerusalem the Spirit of grace and of supplication, so that **they will look on <span style="font-size:23px;">Me</span> whom they have pierced;** and **they will mourn for Him, as one mourns for an only son, and they will weep bitterly over Him like the bitter weeping over a firstborn.** &mdash; Zechariah 12:10 LSB (NASB '95 61.65% / 67.99%)

> BEHOLD, HE IS COMING WITH THE CLOUDS, AND **EVERY EYE WILL SEE HIM, EVEN THOSE WHO PIERCED HIM;** and **all the tribes of the earth will mourn over Him.** Yes, amen. &mdash; Revelation 1:7 LSB (NASB '95 61.65% / 67.99%)

Jesus is Yahweh God!

<script>
	var refTagger = {
		settings: {
			bibleVersion: 'ESV'
		}
	}; 

	(function(d, t) {
		var n=d.querySelector('[nonce]');
		refTagger.settings.nonce = n && (n.nonce||n.getAttribute('nonce'));
		var g = d.createElement(t), s = d.getElementsByTagName(t)[0];
		g.src = 'https://api.reftagger.com/v2/RefTagger.js';
		g.nonce = refTagger.settings.nonce;
		s.parentNode.insertBefore(g, s);
	}(document, 'script'));
</script>