---
layout: post
title: "Defending Jesus Deity: The Apostles And Crew Worshipped Jesus As God! ✝️"
date: 2022-08-15 15:49:16 -0500
categories: god jesus deity bible cults
published: true
---

## The Apostles And Crew Worshipped Jesus As God!

Jesus never rebuked any Angel or any of His followers for worshiping Him and yet worship of anything or anyone other than God is absolutely forbidden in the Bible.

<!-- > And Jesus answered and said to him, **“It is written, ‘You shall worship the Lord your God and serve Him only.’”** &mdash; Luke 4:8 LSB -->

> And Jesus answered and said unto him, Get thee behind me, Satan: for it is written, Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and him only shalt thou serve. &mdash; Luke 4:8 KJV

<!-- > Then Jesus said to him, **“Go, Satan! For it is written, ‘You shall worship the Lord your God, and serve Him only.’”** &mdash; Matthew 4:10 LSB -->

> Then saith Jesus unto him, Get thee hence, Satan: for it is written, Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and him only shalt thou serve. &mdash; Matthew 4:10 KJV

`Formal Equivalence (Word-For-Word)`
- Received Text (Textus Receptus)

    > And when they were come into the ship, the wind ceased.
	>
	33 Then they that were in the ship came and **worshipped him,** saying, Of a truth thou art the Son of God. &mdash; Matthew 14:32-33 KJV (48.83% / 66.58%)

	--

    > And when they got into the boat, the wind ceased.
	>
	33 Then those who were in the boat [a]came and **worshiped Him,** saying, “Truly You are the Son of God.” &mdash; Matthew 14:32-33 NKJV (60.32% / 65.21%)

	--

    > And when they got into the boat, the wind ceased. 33 Then those who were in the boat came and **worshipped Him,** saying, “Truly You are the Son of God.” &mdash; Matthew 14:32-33 MEV (Modern English Version)

- Majority Text

    > When they got up into the boat, the wind ceased. 33 Those who were in the boat came and **worshiped him,** saying, “You are truly the Son of God!” &mdash; Matthew 14:32-33 WEB (World English Bible)

- Critical Text

    > And when they got into the boat, the wind stopped. 33 And those who were in the boat **worshiped Him,** saying, “You are truly God’s Son!” &mdash; Matthew 14:32-33 LSB (NASB '95 61.65% / 67.99%)

    > And when they got into the boat, the wind ceased. 33 And those in the boat **worshiped him,** saying, “Truly you are the Son of God.” &mdash; Matthew 14:32-33 ESV (62.36% / 68.74%)

`Dynamic Equivalence (Thought-For-Thought)`
- Critical Text

    > When they climbed back into the boat, the wind stopped. 33 Then the disciples **worshiped him.** “You really are the Son of God!” they exclaimed. &mdash; Matthew 14:32-33 NLT (70.08% / 39.90%)

    > And when they climbed into the boat, the wind died down. 33 Then those who were in the boat **worshiped him,** saying, “Truly you are the Son of God.” &mdash; Matthew 14:32-33 NIV (67.20% / 53.10%)

    > When they went up into the boat, the wind ceased. 33 Then those who were in the boat **worshiped him,** saying, “Truly you are the Son of God.” &mdash; Matthew 14:32-33 NET (66.28% / 53.94%)

- NET Bible Translator Notes
    
    > a.

[`Messianic Bible translations`](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Messianic_Bible_translations)
- Critical Text
    > When they got into the boat, the wind ceased. 33 And those in the boat **worshiped Him,** saying, “You really are Ben-Elohim!”[a] &mdash; Matthew 14:32-33 TLV (Tree of Life Version, Formal Equivalent) a. Matthew 14:33 Prov. 30:4.

    > As they went up into the boat, the wind ceased. 33 The men in the boat fell down before him and exclaimed, “You really are God’s son!” &mdash; Matthew 14:32-33 CJB (Complete Jewish Bible, Dynamic Equivalent)

`Highly Idiomatic Translation / Paraphrase`
- Critical Text
    > 32-33 The two of them climbed into the boat, and the wind died down. The disciples in the boat, having watched the whole thing, **worshiped Jesus,** saying, “This is it! You are God’s Son for sure!” &mdash; Matthew 14:32-33 MSG (The Message)

## Conclusion

Jesus receives worship! And God only is to receive worship Luke 4:8; Matthew 4:10. Jesus is God!

<script>
	var refTagger = {
		settings: {
			bibleVersion: 'ESV'
		}
	}; 

	(function(d, t) {
		var n=d.querySelector('[nonce]');
		refTagger.settings.nonce = n && (n.nonce||n.getAttribute('nonce'));
		var g = d.createElement(t), s = d.getElementsByTagName(t)[0];
		g.src = 'https://api.reftagger.com/v2/RefTagger.js';
		g.nonce = refTagger.settings.nonce;
		s.parentNode.insertBefore(g, s);
	}(document, 'script'));
</script>