---
layout: post
title: "Defending Jesus Deity: Jesus Is God Because No One Has Seen God ✝️"
date: 2022-08-18 14:14:14 -0500
categories: god jesus deity bible cults
published: true
---

## The Bible Tells Us That No One Has Ever Seen God

> **No one has seen God at any time**; the only begotten God who is in the bosom of the Father, He has explained Him. &mdash; John 1:18 LSB

> **No one has beheld God at any time**; if we love one another, God abides in us, and His love is perfected in us. &mdash; 1 John 4:12 LSB 

> Not that anyone has seen **the Father**, except the One who is from God; He has seen **the Father**. &mdash; John 6:46 LSB

> But He said, “You cannot see My face, for no man can see Me and live!” &mdash; Exodus 33:20 LSB

# Yet, in the Old Testament, the Bible tells us that God was seen!

> God spoke further to Moses and said to him, “**I am Yahweh**; 3 **and I appeared to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, as God Almighty**, but by My name, Yahweh, I was not known to them. &mdash; Exodus 6:2-3 LSB

> So Moses took the blood and sprinkled it on the people and said, “Behold the blood of the covenant, **which Yahweh has cut with you** in accordance with all these words.” 9 Then Moses went up with Aaron, Nadab and Abihu, and seventy of the elders of Israel, 10 **and they saw the God of Israel; and under His feet there appeared to be a pavement of sapphire, as clear as the sky itself.** 11 Yet He did not stretch out His hand against the nobles of the sons of Israel; and **they beheld God, and they ate and drank.** 12 **Now Yahweh said to Moses**, “Come up to Me on the mountain and remain there, and I will give you the stone tablets with the law and the commandment which I have written for their instruction.” &mdash; Exodus 24:8-12 LSB

> **Thus Yahweh used to speak to Moses face to face**, just as a man speaks to his friend. Then Moses would return to the camp, and his attendant Joshua the son of Nun, a young man, would not depart from the tent. &mdash; Exodus 33:11 LSB

> and He said, “Hear now My words: If there is a prophet among you, **I, Yahweh**, shall make Myself known to him in a vision. I shall speak with him in a dream. 7 **Not so, with My servant Moses**, He is faithful in all My household; 8 **With him I speak mouth to mouth, Indeed clearly, and not in riddles, And he beholds the form of Yahweh.** Why then were you not afraid To speak against My servant, against Moses?” 9 So the anger of **Yahweh** burned against them, and He went away. &mdash; Numbers 12:6-9 LSB

> And he said, “Hear me, brothers and fathers! The God of glory appeared to our father Abraham when he was in Mesopotamia, before he lived in Haran, &mdash; Acts 7:2 LSB

If no one has ever seen God (Jn 1:18;6:46, 1 Jn 4:12), Who were they seeing (Ex 6:2-3;24:9-11;33:11, Num 12:6-9, Acts 7:2)?

## Conclusion

The paradox that no one has ever seen God (Jn 1:18;6:46, 1 Jn 4:12), and that God was seen (Ex 6:2-3;24:9-11;33:11, Num 12:6-9, Acts 7:2), is easily cleared up for those of us who actually read and understand the Bible. We find in Jn 6:46 that it is God the Father that has never been seen.

> Not that anyone has seen **the Father**, except the One who is from God; He has seen **the Father**. &mdash; John 6:46 LSB

✔️ **Jesus IS the Yahweh God of the Old Testament made manifest in the flesh (Jn 1:1-3,14,18) Just as he claimed to be (Jn 8:56-59; Ex 3:14-16)!** 

> No one has ever seen God, but **the one and only Son, who is himself God** and is in closest relationship with the Father, has made him known. &mdash; John 1:18 NIV

<!-- <script>
	var refTagger = {
		settings: {
			bibleVersion: 'LEB'
		}
	}; 

	(function(d, t) {
		var n=d.querySelector('[nonce]');
		refTagger.settings.nonce = n && (n.nonce||n.getAttribute('nonce'));
		var g = d.createElement(t), s = d.getElementsByTagName(t)[0];
		g.src = 'https://api.reftagger.com/v2/RefTagger.js';
		g.nonce = refTagger.settings.nonce;
		s.parentNode.insertBefore(g, s);
	}(document, 'script'));
</script> -->

<script src='https://www.blueletterbible.org/assets-v3/scripts/blbToolTip/BLB_ScriptTagger-min.js' type='text/javascript'></script>
<script type='text/javascript'>
// Additional settings
BLB.Tagger.Translation = 'LSB';
BLB.Tagger.HyperLinks = 'all'; // 'all', 'none', 'hover'
BLB.Tagger.HideTanslationAbbrev = false;
BLB.Tagger.TargetNewWindow = true;
BLB.Tagger.Style = 'par'; // 'line' or 'par'
BLB.Tagger.NoSearchTagNames = ''; // HTML element list
BLB.Tagger.NoSearchClassNames = 'noTag doNotTag'; // CSS class list
</script>