---
layout: post
title: "Defending Jesus Deity: Whoever Calls On The Name Of The Lord Will Be Saved ✝️"
date: 2022-08-16 18:15:35 -0500
categories: god jesus deity bible cults
published: true
---

## Whoever Calls On The Name Of The Lord Will Be Saved

`Formal Equivalence (Word-For-Word)`
- Received Text (Textus Receptus)

    >  For **whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord shall be saved.**
    >
    14 How then shall they call on him in whom they have not believed? and how shall they believe in him of whom they have not heard? and how shall they hear without a preacher? &mdash; Romans 10:13-14 KJV (48.83% / 66.58%)

    --

    > For **“whoever calls on the name of the Lord shall be saved.”**
    >
    **Israel Rejects the Gospel**<br>
    14 How then shall they call on Him in whom they have not believed? And how shall they believe in Him of whom they have not heard? And how shall they hear without a preacher? &mdash; Romans 10:13-14 NKJV (60.32% / 65.21%)

    --

    > For, **“Everyone who calls on the name of the Lord shall be saved.”**[a]
    >
    14 How then shall they call on Him in whom they have not believed? And how shall they believe in Him of whom they have not heard? And how shall they hear without a preacher? &mdash; Romans 10:13-14 MEV (Modern English Version) a. Joel 2:32.

- Majority Text

    > For, **“Whoever will call on the name of the Lord will be saved.”Joel 2:32** 14 How then will they call on him in whom they have not believed? How will they believe in him whom they have not heard? How will they hear without a preacher? &mdash; Romans 10:13-14 WEB (World English Bible)

- Critical Text

    > for **“Whoever calls on the name of the Lord will be saved.”**
    14 How then will they call on Him in whom they have not believed? How will they believe in Him whom they have not heard? And how will they hear without a preacher? &mdash; Romans 10:13-14 LSB (NASB '95 61.65% / 67.99%)

    --

    > for **“Whoever will call on the name of the Lord will be saved.”**
    >
    14 How then will they call on Him in whom they have not believed? How will they believe in Him whom they have not heard? And how will they hear without a preacher? &mdash; Romans 10:13-14 NASB '95 (61.65% / 67.99%)

    --

    > for **“Everyone who calls on the name of the Lord will be saved.”**
    >
    14 How then are they to call on Him in whom they have not believed? How are they to believe in Him whom they have not heard? And how are they to hear without a preacher? &mdash; Romans 10:13-14 NASB (61.65% / 67.99%)

    --

    > For **“everyone who calls on the name of the Lord will be saved.”**
    >
    14 How then will they call on him in whom they have not believed? And how are they to believe in him of whom they have never heard?[a] And how are they to hear without someone preaching? &mdash; Romans 10:13-14 ESV (62.36% / 68.74%)

`Dynamic Equivalence (Thought-For-Thought)`
- Critical Text

    > For **“Everyone who calls on the name of the Lord will be saved.”**[a]
    >
    14 But how can they call on him to save them unless they believe in him? And how can they believe in him if they have never heard about him? And how can they hear about him unless someone tells them? &mdash; Romans 10:13-14 NLT (70.08% / 39.90%)

    --

    > for, **“Everyone who calls on the name of the Lord will be saved.”**[a]
    >
    14 How, then, can they call on the one they have not believed in? And how can they believe in the one of whom they have not heard? And how can they hear without someone preaching to them? &mdash; Romans 10:13-14 NIV (67.20% / 53.10%)

    --

    > For **everyone who calls on the name of the Lord will be saved.**[a]
    >
    14 How are they to call on one they have not believed in? And how are they to believe in one they have not heard of? And how are they to hear without someone preaching to them?[b] &mdash; Romans 10:13-14 NET (66.28% / 53.94%)

- NET Bible Translator Notes
    
    > a.Romans 10:13 NET sn **A quotation from Joel 2:32.**
    >
    b. Romans 10:14 NET tn Grk “preaching”; the words “to them” are supplied for clarification.

[`Messianic Bible translations`](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Messianic_Bible_translations)
- Critical Text
    > For **“Everyone who calls upon the name of Adonai shall be saved.”**[a]
    >
    14 How then shall they call on the One in whom they have not trusted? And how shall they trust in the One they have not heard of? And how shall they hear without someone proclaiming? &mdash; Romans 10:13-14 TLV (Tree of Life Version, Formal Equivalent) a. Joel 2:32(LXX); cf. Joel 3:5.

    --

    > since **everyone who calls on the name of Adonai will be delivered.**[a]
    >
    14 But how can they call on someone if they haven’t trusted in him? And how can they trust in someone if they haven’t heard about him? And how can they hear about someone if no one is proclaiming him? &mdash; Romans 10:13-14 CJB (Complete Jewish Bible, Dynamic Equivalent) a. Joel 3:5(2:32)

`Highly Idiomatic Translation / Paraphrase`
- Critical Text
    > 11-13 Scripture reassures us, “No one who trusts God like this—heart and soul—will ever regret it.” It’s exactly the same no matter what a person’s religious background may be: the same God for all of us, acting the same incredibly generous way to **everyone who calls out for help. “Everyone who calls, ‘Help, God!’ gets help.”**
    >
    14-17 But how can people call for help if they don’t know who to trust? And how can they know who to trust if they haven’t heard of the One who can be trusted? And how can they hear if nobody tells them? And how is anyone going to tell them, unless someone is sent to do it? That’s why Scripture exclaims,
    >
    A sight to take your breath away!
    Grand processions of people
        telling all the good things of God!
    >
    But not everybody is ready for this, ready to see and hear and act. Isaiah asked what we all ask at one time or another: “Does anyone care, God? Is anyone listening and believing a word of it?” The point is: Before you trust, you have to listen. But unless Christ’s Word is preached, there’s nothing to listen to. &mdash; Romans 10:13-14 MSG (The Message)

## Conclusion

Paul is speaking of calling upon Jesus. The phrase *“Call upon the name of the Lord”* is a quote from Joel 2:32.

> And it will be that everyone who calls on the name of Yahweh<br>
Will be delivered;<br>
For on Mount Zion and in Jerusalem<br>
There will be those who escape,<br>
As Yahweh has said,<br>
Even among the survivors whom Yahweh calls.<br>

<script>
	var refTagger = {
		settings: {
			bibleVersion: 'ESV'
		}
	}; 

	(function(d, t) {
		var n=d.querySelector('[nonce]');
		refTagger.settings.nonce = n && (n.nonce||n.getAttribute('nonce'));
		var g = d.createElement(t), s = d.getElementsByTagName(t)[0];
		g.src = 'https://api.reftagger.com/v2/RefTagger.js';
		g.nonce = refTagger.settings.nonce;
		s.parentNode.insertBefore(g, s);
	}(document, 'script'));
</script>