---
layout: post
title: "Defending Jesus Deity: Paul Identifies Jesus Specifically As Yahweh ✝️"
date: 2022-08-17 13:37:29 -0500
categories: god jesus deity bible cults
published: true
---

## Paul Identifies Jesus Specifically As Yahweh

`Formal Equivalence (Word-For-Word)`
- Received Text (Textus Receptus)

    > That at the name of Jesus **every knee should bow,** of things in heaven, and things in earth, and things under the earth; 11 And that **every tongue should confess** that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father. &mdash; Philippians 2:10-11 KJV (48.83% / 66.58%)

    > that at the name of Jesus **every knee should bow,** of those in heaven, and of those on earth, and of those under the earth, 11 and that **every tongue should confess** that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father. &mdash; Philippians 2:10-11 NKJV (60.32% / 65.21%)

    > that at the name of Jesus **every knee should bow,** of those in heaven and on earth and under the earth, 11 and **every tongue should confess** that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father.[a] &mdash; Philippians 2:10-11 MEV (Modern English Version) a. Philippians 2:11 A hymn about Jesus’ attitude of servanthood.

- Majority Text

    > that at the name of Jesus **every knee should bow,** of those in heaven, those on earth, and those under the earth, 11 and that **every tongue should confess** that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father. &mdash; Philippians 2:10-11 WEB (World English Bible)

- Critical Text

    > so that at the name of Jesus **EVERY KNEE WILL BOW,** of those who are in heaven and on earth and under the earth, 11 and that **EVERY TONGUE WILL CONFESS** that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father. &mdash; Philippians 2:10-11 LSB (NASB '95 61.65% / 67.99%)

    > so that at the name of Jesus **every knee should bow,** in heaven and on earth and under the earth, 11 and **every tongue confess** that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father. &mdash; Philippians 2:10-11 ESV (62.36% / 68.74%)

`Dynamic Equivalence (Thought-For-Thought)`
- Critical Text

    > that at the name of Jesus **every knee should bow,** in heaven and on earth and under the earth, 11 and **every tongue declare** that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father. &mdash; Philippians 2:10-11 NLT (70.08% / 39.90%)

    > that at the name of Jesus **every knee should bow,** in heaven and on earth and under the earth, 11 and **every tongue acknowledge** that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father. &mdash; Philippians 2:10-11 NIV (67.20% / 53.10%)

    > so that at the name of Jesus **every knee will bow**—in heaven and on earth and under the earth— 11 and **every tongue confess** that Jesus Christ is Lord to the glory of God the Father. &mdash; Philippians 2:10-11 NET (66.28% / 53.94%)


[`Messianic Bible translations`](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Messianic_Bible_translations)
- Critical Text
    > that at the name of Yeshua **every knee should bow,**[a] in heaven and on the earth and under the earth, 11 and **every tongue profess** that Yeshua the Messiah is Lord—to the glory of God the Father. &mdash; Philippians 2:10-11 TLV (Tree of Life Version, Formal Equivalent)

    > that in honor of the name given Yeshua, **every knee will bow** — in heaven, on earth and under the earth — 11 and **every tongue will acknowledge**[a] that Yeshua the Messiah is Adonai — to the glory of God the Father. &mdash; Philippians 2:10-11 CJB (Complete Jewish Bible, Dynamic Equivalent) a. Phil 2:11 Isaiah 45:23

`Highly Idiomatic Translation / Paraphrase`
- Critical Text
    > 9-11 Because of that obedience, God lifted him high and honored him far beyond anyone or anything, ever, so that all created beings in heaven and on earth—even those long ago dead and buried—will bow in worship before this Jesus Christ, and call out in praise that he is the Master of all, to the glorious honor of God the Father. &mdash; Philippians 2:9-11 MSG (The Message)

## Conclusion

After stating that Jesus “existed in the form of God” (Philippians 2:6) before His incarnation on earth, Paul identifies Jesus specifically as Yahweh (Philippians 2:10-11) by applying Isaiah 45:22-23 to Jesus.

> Declare and draw near with your case;
Indeed, let them consult together.
Who has made this heard from of old?
Who has long since declared it?
**Is it not I, Yahweh?**
And there is no other God besides Me,
A righteous God and a Savior;
There is none except Me.
>
Turn to Me and be saved, all the ends of the earth; For I am God, and there is no other. 
>
23 I have sworn by Myself, The word has gone forth from My mouth in righteousness And will not turn back, That to Me **every knee will bow, every tongue will swear allegiance.** 
>
**They will say of Me, ‘Only in Yahweh** are righteousness and strength.’
Men will come to Him,
And all who were angry at Him will be put to shame. &mdash; Isaiah 45:21-24 LSB (NASB '95 61.65% / 67.99%)

<script>
	var refTagger = {
		settings: {
			bibleVersion: 'ESV'
		}
	}; 

	(function(d, t) {
		var n=d.querySelector('[nonce]');
		refTagger.settings.nonce = n && (n.nonce||n.getAttribute('nonce'));
		var g = d.createElement(t), s = d.getElementsByTagName(t)[0];
		g.src = 'https://api.reftagger.com/v2/RefTagger.js';
		g.nonce = refTagger.settings.nonce;
		s.parentNode.insertBefore(g, s);
	}(document, 'script'));
</script>