---
layout: post
title: "Defending Jesus Deity: Textus Receptus Only! ✝️"
date: 2022-08-12 01:31:20 -0500
categories: god jesus deity bible cults
published: true
---

## Jesus Is God Because Only God Can Forgive Sins

`Formal Equivalence (Word-For-Word)`
- Received Text (Textus Receptus)

    > And without controversy great is the mystery of godliness: **God was manifest in the flesh,** justified in the Spirit, seen of angels, preached unto the Gentiles, believed on in the world, received up into glory. &mdash; 1 Timothy 3:16 KJV (48.83% / 66.58%)

    > And without controversy great is the [a]mystery of godliness: **God**[b] **was manifested in the flesh,** Justified in the Spirit, Seen by angels, Preached among the Gentiles, Believed on in the world, Received up in glory. &mdash; 1 Timothy 3:16 NKJV (60.32% / 65.21%) b. NU Who

    > Without question, great is the mystery of godliness: **God was revealed in the flesh,** justified in the Spirit, seen by angels, preached to the Gentiles, believed on in the world, taken up into glory. &mdash; 1 Timothy 3:16 MEV (Modern English Version)

- Majority Text

    > Without controversy, the mystery of godliness is great: **God[a] was revealed in the flesh,** justified in the spirit, seen by angels, preached among the nations, believed on in the world, and received up in glory. &mdash; 1 Timothy 3:16 WEB (World English Bible)

- Critical Text

    > And by common confession, great is the mystery of godliness: **He who was manifested in the flesh,** Was vindicated in the Spirit, Seen by angels,Proclaimed among the nations, Believed on in the world, Taken up in glory. &mdash; 1 Timothy 3:16 LSB (NASB '95 61.65% / 67.99%)

    > Great indeed, we confess, is the mystery of godliness: **He**[a] **was manifested in the flesh,** vindicated[b] by the Spirit,[c] seen by angels,proclaimed among the nations, believed on in the world, taken up in glory. &mdash; 1 Timothy 3:16 ESV (62.36% / 68.74%) a. Greek Who; some manuscripts God; others Which

`Dynamic Equivalence (Thought-For-Thought)`
- Critical Text

    > Without question, this is the great mystery of our faith[a]: **Christ**[b]**was revealed in a human body** and vindicated by the Spirit.[c] He was seen by angels and announced to the nations. He was believed in throughout the world and taken to heaven in glory. &mdash; 1 Timothy 3:16 NLT (70.08% / 39.90%)

    > Beyond all question, the mystery from which true godliness springs is great: **He appeared in the flesh,** was vindicated by the Spirit,[a] was seen by angels, was preached among the nations, was believed on in the world, was taken up in glory. &mdash; 1 Timothy 3:16 NIV (67.20% / 53.10%)

    > And we all agree,[a] our religion contains amazing revelation:[b] **He**[c] **was revealed in the flesh,** vindicated by the Spirit,[d] seen by angels, proclaimed among Gentiles, believed on in the world, taken up in glory. &mdash; 1 Timothy 3:16 NET (66.28% / 53.94%)

- NET Bible Translator Notes
    
    > c. 1 Timothy 3:16 NET tc The Byzantine text along with a few other witnesses (א3 Ac C2 D2 Ψ [88] 1241 1505 1739 1881 M al vgms) read θεός (theos, “God”) for ὅς (hos, “who”). Most significant among these witnesses is 1739; the second correctors of some of the other mss tend to conform to the medieval standard, the Byzantine text, and add no independent voice to the textual problem. At least two mss have ὁ θεός (69 88), a reading that is a correction on the anarthrous θεός. On the other side, the masculine relative pronoun ὅς is strongly supported by א* A* C* F G 33 365 1175 Did Epiph. Significantly, D* and virtually the entire Latin tradition read the neuter relative pronoun, ὅ (ho, “which”), a reading that indirectly supports ὅς since it could not easily have been generated if θεός had been in the text. Thus, externally, there is no question as to what should be considered the Ausgangstext: The Alexandrian and Western traditions are decidedly in favor of ὅς. Internally, the evidence is even stronger. What scribe would change θεός to ὅς intentionally? “Who” is not only a theologically pale reading by comparison; it also is much harder (since the relative pronoun has no obvious antecedent, probably the reason for the neuter pronoun of the Western tradition). Intrinsically, the rest of 3:16, beginning with ὅς, appears to form a hymn with six strophes. As such, it is a text that is seemingly incorporated into the letter without syntactical connection. Hence, not only should we not look for an antecedent for ὅς (as is often done by commentators), but the relative pronoun thus is not too hard a reading (or impossible, as Dean Burgon believed). Once the genre is taken into account, the relative pronoun fits neatly into the author’s style (cf. also Col 1:15; Phil 2:6 for other places in which the relative pronoun begins a hymn, as was often the case in poetry of the day). On the other hand, with θεός written as a nomen sacrum, it would have looked very much like the relative pronoun: q-=s vs. os. Thus, it may have been easy to confuse one for the other. This, of course, does not solve which direction the scribes would go, although given their generally high Christology and the bland and ambiguous relative pronoun, it is doubtful that they would have replaced θεός with ὅς. How then should we account for θεός? It appears that sometime after the 2nd century the θεός reading came into existence, either via confusion with ὅς or as an intentional alteration to magnify Christ and clear up the syntax at the same time. Once it got in, this theologically rich reading was easily able to influence all the rest of the mss it came in contact with (including mss already written, such as א A C D). That this reading did not arise until after the 2nd century is evident from the Western reading, ὅ. The neuter relative pronoun is certainly a “correction” of ὅς, conforming the gender to that of the neuter μυστήριον (mustērion, “mystery”). What is significant in this reading is (1) since virtually all the Western witnesses have either the masculine or neuter relative pronoun, the θεός reading was apparently unknown to them in the 2nd century (when the “Western” text seems to have originated, though its place of origination was most likely in the east); they thus supply strong indirect evidence of ὅς outside of Egypt in the 2nd century; (2) even 2nd century scribes were liable to misunderstand the genre, feeling compelled to alter the masculine relative pronoun because it appeared to them to be too harsh. The evidence, therefore, for ὅς is quite compelling, both externally and internally. As TCGNT 574 notes, “no uncial (in the first hand) earlier than the eighth or ninth century (Ψ) supports θεός; all ancient versions presuppose ὅς or ὅ; and no patristic writer prior to the last third of the fourth century testifies to the reading θεός.” Thus, the cries of certain groups that θεός has to be original must be seen as special pleading. To argue that heretics tampered with the text here is self-defeating, for most of the Western fathers who quoted the verse with the relative pronoun were quite orthodox, strongly affirming the deity of Christ. They would have dearly loved such a reading as θεός. Further, had heretics introduced a variant to θεός, a far more natural choice would have been Χριστός (Christos, “Christ”) or κύριος (kurios, “Lord”), since the text is self-evidently about Christ, but it is not self-evidently a proclamation of his deity. (See ExSyn 341-42, for a summary discussion on this issue and additional bibliographic references.)tn Grk “who.”sn This passage has been typeset as poetry because many scholars regard this passage as poetic or hymnic. These terms are used broadly to refer to the genre of writing, not to the content. There are two broad criteria for determining if a passage is poetic or hymnic: “(a) stylistic: a certain rhythmical lilt when the passages are read aloud, the presence of parallelismus membrorum (i.e., an arrangement into couplets), the semblance of some metre, and the presence of rhetorical devices such as alliteration, chiasmus, and antithesis; and (b) linguistic: an unusual vocabulary, particularly the presence of theological terms, which is different from the surrounding context” (P. T. O’Brien, Philippians [NIGTC], 188-89). Classifying a passage as hymnic or poetic is important because understanding this genre can provide keys to interpretation. However, not all scholars agree that the above criteria are present in this passage, so the decision to typeset it as poetry should be viewed as a tentative decision about its genre.

[`Messianic Bible translations`](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Messianic_Bible_translations)
- Critical Text
    > Now beyond question, great is the mystery of godliness: **He was revealed in the flesh,** Vindicated in the Spirit, Seen by angels, Proclaimed among the nations, Trusted throughout the world, Taken up in glory. &mdash; 1 Timothy 3:16 TLV (Tree of Life Version, Formal Equivalent)

    > Great beyond all question is the formerly hidden truth underlying our faith: **He was manifested physically** and proved righteous spiritually, seen by angels and proclaimed among the nations, trusted throughout the world and raised up in glory to heaven. &mdash; 1 Timothy 3:16 CJB (Complete Jewish Bible, Dynamic Equivalent)

`Highly Idiomatic Translation / Paraphrase`
- Critical Text
    > 14-16 I hope to visit you soon, but just in case I’m delayed, I’m writing this letter so you’ll know how things ought to go in God’s household, this God-alive church, bastion of truth. This Christian life is a great mystery, far exceeding our understanding, but some things are clear enough:
	>
	**He appeared in a human body,** was proved right by the invisible Spirit, was seen by angels. He was proclaimed among all kinds of peoples, believed in all over the world, taken up into heavenly glory. &mdash; 1 Timothy 3:16 MSG (The Message)

## Conclusion

In this particular verse, only the Textus Receptus and Majority Text derived translations reflect that "God was manifest in the flesh". The Critical Text renders "He was manifested in the flesh".

<script>
	var refTagger = {
		settings: {
			bibleVersion: 'ESV'
		}
	}; 

	(function(d, t) {
		var n=d.querySelector('[nonce]');
		refTagger.settings.nonce = n && (n.nonce||n.getAttribute('nonce'));
		var g = d.createElement(t), s = d.getElementsByTagName(t)[0];
		g.src = 'https://api.reftagger.com/v2/RefTagger.js';
		g.nonce = refTagger.settings.nonce;
		s.parentNode.insertBefore(g, s);
	}(document, 'script'));
</script>