---
layout: post
title: "Defending Jesus Deity: God The Father Refers To Jesus As Yahweh! ✝️"
date: 2022-08-16 19:57:10 -0500
categories: god jesus deity bible cults
published: true
---

## God The Father Refers To Jesus As Yahweh!

`Formal Equivalence (Word-For-Word)`
- Received Text (Textus Receptus)

    > And, Thou, Lord, in the beginning hast laid the foundation of the earth; and the heavens are the works of thine hands:
    >
    11 They shall perish; but thou remainest; and they all shall wax old as doth a garment;
    >
    12 And as a vesture shalt thou fold them up, and they shall be changed: but thou art the same, and thy years shall not fail. &mdash; Hebrews 1:10-12 KJV (48.83% / 66.58%)

    --

    > And:
    >> “You, Lord, in the beginning laid the foundation of the earth,<br>
    And the heavens are the work of Your hands.<br>
    11 They will perish, but You remain;<br>
    And they will all grow old like a garment;<br>
    12 Like a cloak You will fold them up,<br>
    And they will be changed.<br>
    But You are the same,<br>
    And Your years will not fail.” &mdash; Hebrews 1:10-12 NKJV (60.32% / 65.21%)

    --

    > And,
    >> “You, Lord, laid the foundation of the earth in the beginning,<br>
    and the heavens are the works of Your hands.<br>
    11 They will perish, but You remain;<br>
        and they all will wear out like a garment;<br>
    12 as a cloak You will fold them up,<br>
        and they will be changed.<br>
    But You are the same,<br>
        and Your years will not end.”[a] &mdash; Hebrews 1:10-12 MEV (Modern English Version) a. Hebrews 1:12 Ps 102:25–27.

- Majority Text

    > And,
    >>“You, Lord, in the beginning, laid the foundation of the earth.<br>
    The heavens are the works of your hands.<br>
    11 They will perish, but you continue.<br>
        They all will grow old like a garment does.<br>
    12 You will roll them up like a mantle,<br>
        and they will be changed;<br>
        but you are the same.<br>
        Your years won’t fail.”Psalm 102:25-27 &mdash; Hebrews 1:10-12 WEB (World English Bible)

- Critical Text

    > And,
    >> “YOU, LORD, IN THE BEGINNING FOUNDED THE EARTH,<br>
    AND THE HEAVENS ARE THE WORKS OF YOUR HANDS;<br>
    11 THEY WILL PERISH, BUT YOU REMAIN;<br>
    AND THEY ALL WILL WEAR OUT LIKE A GARMENT,<br>
    12 AND LIKE A MANTLE YOU WILL ROLL THEM UP;<br>
    LIKE A GARMENT THEY WILL ALSO BE CHANGED.<br>
    BUT YOU ARE THE SAME,<br>
    AND YOUR YEARS WILL NOT COME TO AN END.” &mdash; Hebrews 1:10-12 LSB (NASB '95 61.65% / 67.99%)

    --

    >  And,
    >> 
    “You, Lord, laid the foundation of the earth in the beginning,<br>
        and the heavens are the work of your hands;<br>
    11 they will perish, but you remain;<br>
        they will all wear out like a garment,<br>
    12 like a robe you will roll them up,<br>
        like a garment they will be changed.[a]<br>
    But you are the same,<br>
        and your years will have no end.” &mdash; Hebrews 1:10-12 ESV (62.36% / 68.74%) a. Hebrews 1:12 Some manuscripts omit like a garment

`Dynamic Equivalence (Thought-For-Thought)`
- Critical Text

    > He also says to the Son,
    >>
    “In the beginning, Lord, you laid the foundation of the earth<br>
        and made the heavens with your hands.<br>
    11 They will perish, but you remain forever.<br>
        They will wear out like old clothing.<br>
    12 You will fold them up like a cloak<br>
        and discard them like old clothing.<br>
    But you are always the same;<br>
        you will live forever.”[a] &mdash; Hebrews 1:10-12 NLT (70.08% / 39.90%) a. 1:10-12 Ps 102:25-27.

    --

    > He also says,
    >>
    “In the beginning, Lord, you laid the foundations of the earth,<br>
        and the heavens are the work of your hands.<br>
    11 They will perish, but you remain;<br>
        they will all wear out like a garment.<br>
    12 You will roll them up like a robe;<br>
        like a garment they will be changed.<br>
    But you remain the same,<br>
        and your years will never end.”[a] &mdash; Hebrews 1:10-12 NIV (67.20% / 53.10%) a. Hebrews 1:12 Psalm 102:25-27

    --

    > And,
    >>
    **“You founded the earth in the beginning, Lord,**[a]<br>
    **and the heavens are the works of your hands.**<br>
    11 **They will perish, but you continue.**<br>
    **And they will all grow old like a garment,**<br>
    12 **and like a robe you will fold them up**<br>
    **and like a garment**[b] **they will be changed,**<br>
    **but you are the same and your years will never run out.”**[c] &mdash; Hebrews 1:10-12 NET (66.28% / 53.94%)

- NET Bible Translator Notes
    
    > a. Hebrews 1:10 NET sn You founded the earth…your years will never run out. In its original setting Ps 102:25-27 refers to the work of God in creation, but here in Hebrews 1:10-12 the writer employs it in reference to Christ, the Lord, making a strong argument for the essential deity of the Son.
    b. Hebrews 1:12 NET tc The words “like a garment” (ὡς ἱμάτιον, hōs himation) are found in excellent and early mss (P46 א A B D* 1739) though absent in a majority of witnesses (D1 Ψ 0243 0278 33 1881 M lat sy bo). Although it is possible that longer reading was produced by overzealous scribes who wanted to underscore the frailty of creation, it is much more likely that the shorter reading was produced by scribes who wanted to conform the wording to that of Ps 102:26 (101:27 LXX), which here lacks the second “like a garment.” Both external and internal considerations decidedly favor the longer reading, and point to the author of Hebrews as the one underscoring the difference between the Son and creation.sn The phrase like a garment here is not part of the original OT text (see tc note above); for this reason it has been printed in normal type.
    c. Hebrews 1:12 NET sn A quotation from Ps 102:25-27.

[`Messianic Bible translations`](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Messianic_Bible_translations)
- Critical Text
    > And,
    >>
    “In the beginning, Adonai,<br>
    You laid the foundation of the earth,<br>
        and the heavens are the works of Your hands.<br>
    11 They shall pass away, but You remain.<br>
        And they will all wear out like clothing.[a]<br>
    12 And like a robe You will roll them up,<br>
        and like clothing they will be changed;<br>
    but You are the same,<br>
        and Your years shall never end.”[b] &mdash; Hebrews 1:10-12 TLV (Tree of Life Version, Formal Equivalent) a. Hebrews 1:11 cf. Isa. 50:9; 51:6. b. Hebrews 1:12 Ps. 102:26-28(25-27); 101:26-28(LXX).

    > and,
    >>
    “In the beginning, Lord, you laid the foundations of the earth;<br>
    heaven is the work of your hands.<br>
    11 They will vanish, but you will remain;<br>
    like clothing, they will all grow old;<br>
    12 and you will fold them up like a coat.<br>
    Yes, they will be changed like clothing,<br>
    but you remain the same,<br>
    your years will never end.”[a] &mdash; Hebrews 1:10-12 CJB (Complete Jewish Bible, Dynamic Equivalent) a. Hebrews 1:12 Psalm 102:26–28(25–27)

`Highly Idiomatic Translation / Paraphrase`
- Critical Text
    > 10-12 And again to the Son,
    >>
    You, Master, started it all, laid earth’s foundations,<br>
        then crafted the stars in the sky.<br>
    Earth and sky will wear out, but not you;<br>
        they become threadbare like an old coat;<br>
    You’ll fold them up like a worn-out cloak,<br>
        and lay them away on the shelf.<br>
    But you’ll stay the same, year after year;<br>
        you’ll never fade, you’ll never wear out. &mdash; Hebrews 1:10-12 MSG (The Message)

## Conclusion

Hebrews 1:10-12 is a direct quote from Psalm 102, a praise Psalm to Yahweh as Lord and Creator, and the author here is saying that the Psalm is speaking about Jesus. The author identifies Jesus as the creator God worshiped by the Psalmist and as Yahweh by name! Jesus is Yahweh God!

> O Yahweh, hear my prayer!
And let my cry for help come to You.
> 
25 Of old You founded the earth,<br>
And the heavens are the work of Your hands.<br>
26 Even they will perish, but You will remain;<br>
And all of them will wear out like a garment;<br>
Like clothing You will change them and they will be changed.<br>
27 But You are the same,<br>
And Your years will not come to an end.<br>&mdash; Psalm 102:1,25-27 LSB (NASB '95 61.65% / 67.99%)

<script>
	var refTagger = {
		settings: {
			bibleVersion: 'ESV'
		}
	}; 

	(function(d, t) {
		var n=d.querySelector('[nonce]');
		refTagger.settings.nonce = n && (n.nonce||n.getAttribute('nonce'));
		var g = d.createElement(t), s = d.getElementsByTagName(t)[0];
		g.src = 'https://api.reftagger.com/v2/RefTagger.js';
		g.nonce = refTagger.settings.nonce;
		s.parentNode.insertBefore(g, s);
	}(document, 'script'));
</script>