---
layout: post
title: "🌊 Is Water Baptism Necessary For Salvation?"
date: 2023-05-16 01:45:30 -0500
categories: baptism
published: true
---

> “I baptize you with water for repentance, but he who is coming after me is mightier than I, whose sandals I am not worthy to carry. <span style="font-weight:bold;color:orangered;">He will baptize you with the Holy Spirit and fire.</span> &mdash; Matthew 3:11 ESV

<a name="contents" style="font-size:2.1em;color:black;">Contents</a>

- I. <a href="#faith">You're Saved At The Point Of Genuine Faith</a>
    - 1.1 <a href="#Ephesians2:8-10">Ephesians 2:8-10</a>
- II. <a href="#thief">The Thief On The Cross</a>
    - 2.1 <a href="#Luke23:43">Luke 23:43</a>
    - 2.2 <a href="#cross">The Cross Is Enough</a>
- III. <a href="#nicodemus">Jesus Expects Nicodemus To Understand</a>
    - 3.1 <a href="#John3:5,7,10">John 3:5,7,10</a>
        - 3.1.1 <a href="#btsb_commentary">NIV Biblical Theology Study</a>
        - 3.1.2 <a href="#esvsb_commentary">ESV Study Bible</a>
        - 3.1.3 <a href="#logos_commentary">LOGOS Faithlife Study</a>
        - 3.1.4 <a href="#net_commentary">NET Full Notes</a>
- IV. <a href="#two">Two Different Baptisms</a>
    - 4.1 <a href="#Acts19:2-5">Acts 19:2-5</a>
- V. <a href="#sin">There's Only 1 Unforgivable Sin</a>
    - 5.1 <a href="#Mk3:28–29">Mark 3:28–29</a>
- VI. <a href="#mark">Longer Ending Of Mark</a>
    - 6.1 <a href="#mss">Missing From Oldest MSS</a>
    - 6.2 <a href="#condemned">Never Says We're Condemned</a>
- VII. <a href="#conclusion">Conclusion</a>


<a name="faith" href="#contents" style="font-size:2.1em">🔥 I. You're Saved At The Point Of Genuine Faith</a>

We are saved at the point of saving faith, not at the point of water baptism.<sup><a href="#grudem">9</a></sup> The Bible specifically states that salvation happens at the moment of true saving faith. Let us not forget that all scripture is the inspired word of God, and God has spoken. (2Ti 3:16 NET)

- <a name="Ephesians2:8-10" href="#contents" style="font-size:1.6em">1.1 Ephesians 2:8-10</a>

    > <sup style="font-weight:bold;">8</sup> <span style="font-weight:bold;color:orangered;">God saved you by his grace <span style="font-size:1.2em;color:red">when you believed</span>.</span> And you can’t take credit for this; it is a gift from God. <sup style="font-weight:bold;">9</sup> Salvation is not a reward for the good things we have done, so none of us can boast about it. <sup style="font-weight:bold;">10</sup> For we are God’s masterpiece. He has created us anew in Christ Jesus, so we can do the good things he planned for us long ago. &mdash; Ephesians 2:8-10 NLT


<a name="thief" href="#contents" style="font-size:2.1em">🔥 II. The Thief On The Cross</a>

Jesus saves the dying thief on the cross without baptism. The thief could not be baptized before he died on the cross, but he was certainly saved that day.<sup><a href="#grudem">9</a></sup> This is why Reformed theology stresses that true saving faith always **results** in obedience and good works **after justification**. We do not say that it **includes** obedience, because that would be works righteousness and no one will make it to heaven based on their own merits (Eph. 2:8-10; Gal. 2:21;5:4; Rom 3:20,28; Gal 2:16; 3:10-12). *Sola fide.*

- <a name="Luke23:43" href="#contents" style="font-size:1.6em">2.1 Luke 23:43</a>

    > And he said to him, “Truly, I say to you, today you will be with me in paradise.” &mdash; Luke 23:43

- <a name="cross" href="#contents" style="font-size:1.6em">2.2 The Cross Is Enough</a>

    > While we should preach that all men are commanded to repent and be baptized (Acts 2:38), <span style="font-weight:bold;color:GoldenRod;">adding any other requirement to salvation by grace becomes "works" in disguise</span>. Even though numerous scriptures speak of the importance of water baptism, <span style="font-weight:bold;color:orangered;">adding anything to the work of the cross <span style="font-size:1.2em;color:red">demeans the sacrifice of the Savior</span>. It implies that His finished work <span style="font-size:1.2em;color:red">wasn't enough</span>.</span> But the Bible makes clear that we are saved by grace, and grace alone (Eph. 2:8,9). Baptism is simply a step of obedience to the Lord following our repentance and confession of sin. Our obedience&mdash;water baptism, prayer, good works, fellowship, witnessing, etc.&mdash;issues from our faith in Christ. Salvation is not based on what we do, but on Who we have: "He who has the Son has life" (1 John 5:12). &mdash; [Ray Comfort (The Evidence Study Bible), p. 1388.](https://amzn.to/3MvN1o6)

<a name="nicodemus" href="#contents" style="font-size:2.1em">🔥 III. Jesus Expects Nicodemus To Understand</a>

The context is imperative. It is crystal clear that Jesus expects Nicodemus to understand what he means, yet, at this point in time, Nicodemus could not have known what John's water baptism was.<sup><a href="#btsb_cite">5</a></sup>

- <a name="John3:5,7,10" href="#contents" style="font-size:1.6em">3.1 John 3:5,7,10</a>

    > <sup style="font-weight:bold;">5</sup> Jesus replied, “I assure you, no one can enter the Kingdom of God without being born of water <span style="font-weight:bold;color:GoldenRod;">and the Spirit</span>. <sup style="font-weight:bold;">6</sup> Humans can reproduce only human life, but <span style="font-weight:bold;color:GoldenRod;">the Holy Spirit gives birth to spiritual life</span>. <sup style="font-weight:bold;">7</sup> So don’t be surprised when I say, <span style="font-weight:bold;color:GoldenRod;">‘You must be <span style="font-size:1.2em;color:Gold;">born again</span>.’</span> <sup style="font-weight:bold;">8</sup> The wind blows wherever it wants. Just as you can hear the wind but can’t tell where it comes from or where it is going, so <span style="font-weight:bold;color:GoldenRod;">you can’t explain how people are <span style="font-size:1.2em;color:Gold;">born of the Spirit</span></span>.” <sup style="font-weight:bold;">9</sup> “How are these things possible?” Nicodemus asked. <sup style="font-weight:bold;">10</sup> <span style="font-weight:bold;color:orangered;">Jesus replied, “You are a respected Jewish teacher, and yet <span style="font-size:1.2em;color:red;">you don’t understand these things?</span></span> &mdash; John3:5,7,10 NLT  

- <a name="btsb_commentary" href="#contents" style="font-size:1.6em">3.1.1 NIV Biblical Theology Study Bible</a>

    > **3:5** born of water and the Spirit. <span style="font-weight:bold;color:GoldenRod;">Parallel with “born again” (vv. 3, 7)</span> and “born of the Spirit” (v. 8), emphasizing a (single) <span style="font-weight:bold;color:GoldenRod;">Spirit-produced birth</span>. This makes several interpretations unlikely: (**1**) that “born of water” refers to natural birth (no ancient sources picture natural birth as “from water,” where “water” is the amniotic fluid that breaks before childbirth); <span style="font-weight:bold;color:orangered;">(**2**) that “born of water” refers to Christian baptism (these words would have had <span style="font-weight:bold;font-size:1.2em;color:red;">no relevance to Nicodemus</span> at the time);</span> (**3**) that “born of water” refers to John’s baptism (also, vv. 9–12 then do not logically follow); (**4**) that “the Spirit” refers to the Word of God (John’s other metaphoric uses of “water” in this Gospel refer to Spirit-produced life [4:14; 7:38–39], not to God’s Word). <span style="font-weight:bold;color:GoldenRod;">The most plausible interpretation of “born of water and the Spirit” is the purifying and transforming new birth.</span> Since <span style="font-weight:bold;font-size:1.2em;color:Gold;">Jesus expects Nicodemus to understand what he means (vv. 7, 10)</span>, the background to the concept is previous Scripture. Water in the OT often refers to renewal or cleansing, and the most significant OT connection bringing together water and spirit is Ezek 36:25–27, where water cleanses from impurity and <span style="font-weight:bold;color:GoldenRod;">the Spirit transforms hearts</span>. <span style="font-weight:bold;color:GoldenRod;">So “born of water and the Spirit” signals <span style="font-size:1.2em;color:Gold;">a new birth</span> that cleanses and transforms.</span> &mdash; <a href="#btsb_cite">NIV Biblical Theology Study Bible<sup>5</sup></a>

- <a name="esvsb_commentary" href="#contents" style="font-size:1.6em">3.1.2 ESV Study Bible Commentary</a>

    > JOHN—NOTE ON 3:3–6 This discussion of the need for <span style="font-weight:bold;color:GoldenRod;">spiritual rebirth</span> further develops the earlier reference to the “children of God” who are “born of God” (1:12–13; cf. 8:39–58; 11:51–52). <span style="font-weight:bold;color:orangered;">The phrase born of water and the Spirit in 3:5 refers to <span style="font-size:1.2em;color:red;">spiritual birth</span></span>, which cleanses from sin and brings spiritual transformation and renewal. Water here does not refer to the water of physical birth, nor is it likely that it refers to baptism. The background is probably Ezek. 36:25–27, where God promises, “I will sprinkle clean water on you, and you shall be clean. … And I will give you a new heart. … And I will put my Spirit within you.” For further discussion of being <span style="font-weight:bold;color:GoldenRod;">born again</span>, see 1 John 2:29; 3:9; 4:7; 5:1, 4, 18. The kingdom of God, a major topic in the other Gospels, is mentioned in John only in 3:3, 5 (see the reference to Jesus’ kingdom in John 18:36). &mdash; <a href="#esvsb_cite">ESV Study Bible<sup>1</sup></a>

- <a name="logos_commentary" href="#contents" style="font-size:1.6em">3.1.3 LOGOS Faithlife Study Bible Commentary</a>

    > **3:5 born of water and spirit** Jesus elaborates on the meaning of being born from above in v. 3, <span style="font-weight:bold;color:GoldenRod;">emphasizing the need for <span style="font-size:1.2em;color:Gold;">spiritual birth</span></span> (see note on v. 3). The ot overtones of the Greek phrase used here, literally rendered as “born of water and spirit,” are meant to make Nicodemus realize that Jesus is inaugurating the age of renewal anticipated by the ot prophets (Joel 2:28; Isa 32:15; 44:3; Ezek 11:19–20; 36:25–27). In this regard, Ezek 36:25–27 clearly combines the imagery of cleansing by water with inner renewal by the spirit (pneuma) from God.
    >> Interpretations of this verse often attempt to connect Jesus’ statement with some type of water baptism, understanding references to both physical and spiritual rebirth symbolized by baptism. The phrase “born of water and spirit” could refer to two births, since John 3:6 contrasts being born of the flesh with being born of the Spirit. However, a reference to the Christian sacrament of baptism is unlikely. The mention of water, though, may allude to John’s baptism, which emphasizes repentance from sin. The danger with understanding “born of water” as a reference to water baptism is that it could be misconstrued as making baptism a requirement for salvation. <span style="font-weight:bold;color:orangered;">Any secondary implications about water baptism should be understood as symbolic of spiritual rebirth, <span style="font-size:1.2em;color:red;">not as a necessary part of salvation</span>.</span> &mdash; <a href="#logos_cite">LOGOS Faithlife Study Bible<sup>4</sup></a>

- <a name="net_commentary" href="#contents" style="font-size:1.6em">3.1.4 NET Bible: Full Notes Edition</a>

    > <sup style="font-weight:bold;">5</sup> Jesus answered, “I tell you the solemn truth, unless a person is born of water and spirit,<sup style="font-weight:bold;">[b]</sup> he cannot enter the kingdom of God. <sup style="font-weight:bold;">6</sup> What is born of the flesh is flesh, and what is born of the Spirit is spirit. <sup style="font-weight:bold;">7</sup> Do not be amazed that I said to you, ‘You must all be born from above.’ <sup style="font-weight:bold;">8</sup> The wind blows wherever it will, and you hear the sound it makes, but do not know where it comes from and where it is going. So it is with everyone who is born of the Spirit.” <sup style="font-weight:bold;">9</sup> Nicodemus replied, “How can these things be?”<sup style="font-weight:bold;">[i]</sup> <sup style="font-weight:bold;">10</sup> Jesus answered, “Are you the teacher of Israel and yet you don’t understand these things?<sup style="font-weight:bold;">[k]</sup>

    >> **b.** John 3:5 tn Or “born of water and wind” (the same Greek word, πνεύματος <span style="font-weight:bold;">[pneumatos]</span>, may be translated either “spirit/Spirit” or “wind”). sn Jesus’ somewhat enigmatic statement points to <span style="font-weight:bold;color:orangered;">the necessity of being <span style="font-size:1.2em;color:red;">born “from above,”</span> because water and wind/spirit/Spirit come from above.</span> Isaiah 44:3-5 and Ezek 37:9-10 are pertinent examples of water and wind as life-giving symbols of the Spirit of God in his work among people. Both occur in contexts that deal with the future restoration of Israel as a nation prior to the establishment of the messianic kingdom. It is therefore particularly appropriate that Jesus should introduce them in a conversation about entering the kingdom of God. Note that the Greek word πνεύματος is anarthrous (has no article) in v. 5. This does not mean that spirit in the verse should be read as a direct reference to the Holy Spirit, but that both water and wind are figures (based on passages in the OT, which Nicodemus, the teacher of Israel should have known) that represent the regenerating work of the Spirit in the lives of men and women. &mdash; <a href="#net_cite">Net Bible Full Notes Edition<sup>2</sup></a> [[online]](https://www.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=John+3%3A5-10&version=NET)

    >> **i.** John 3:9 sn “How can these things be?” is Nicodemus’ answer. <span style="font-weight:bold;color:orangered;">It is clear that at this time he has still not grasped what Jesus is saying.</span> Note also that this is the last appearance of Nicodemus in the dialogue. Having served the purpose of the author, at this point he disappears from the scene. As a character in the narrative, he has served to illustrate the prevailing Jewish misunderstanding of Jesus’ teaching about <span style="font-weight:bold;color:orangered;">the necessity of a <span style="font-size:1.2em;color:red;">new, spiritual birth from above</span>.</span> Whatever parting words Nicodemus might have had with Jesus, the author does not record them. &mdash; <a href="#net_cite">Net Bible Full Notes Edition<sup>2</sup></a> [[online]](https://www.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=John+3%3A5-10&version=NET)

    >> **k.** John 3:10 sn Jesus’ question “Are you the teacher of Israel and yet you don’t understand these things?” implies that <span style="font-weight:bold;color:orangered;">Nicodemus had enough information at his disposal from the OT scriptures to have understood Jesus’ statements about the necessity of being <span style="font-size:1.2em;color:red;">born from above by the regenerating work of the Spirit</span>.</span> Isa 44:3-5 and Ezek 37:9-10 are passages Nicodemus might have known which would have given him insight into Jesus’ words. Another significant passage which contains many of these concepts is Prov 30:4-5. &mdash; <a href="#net_cite">Net Bible Full Notes Edition<sup>2</sup></a> [[online]](https://www.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=John+3%3A5-10&version=NET)


<a name="two" href="#contents" style="font-size:2.1em">🔥 IV. Two Different Baptisms</a>

It is clear that scripture speaks of two different baptisms (Mt 3:11; Ac 1:5). 

- <a name="Acts19:2-5" href="#contents" style="font-size:1.6em">4.1 Acts 19:2-5</a>

    > <sup style="font-weight:bold;">2</sup> And he said to them, “Did you receive the Holy Spirit when you believed?” And they said, “No, we have not even heard that there is a Holy Spirit.” <sup style="font-weight:bold;">3</sup> And he said, “Into what then were you baptized?” They said, “Into John's baptism.” <sup style="font-weight:bold;">4</sup> And Paul said, “John baptized with the baptism of repentance, telling the people to believe in the one who was to come after him, that is, Jesus.” <sup style="font-weight:bold;">5</sup> On hearing this, they were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus. &mdash; <a href="#esvsb_cite">ESV Study Bible<sup>1</sup></a>

<a name="sin" href="#contents" style="font-size:2.1em">🔥 V. There's Only One Unforgivable Sin</a>

There's only one unpardonable, unforgivable, eternal sin, and it's not failing to get baptized (Matt. 12:31-32; Mk 3:28–29; Heb. 6:4-8; 10:26-31). It is the sin of impenitence.

- <a name="Mk3:28–29" href="#contents" style="font-size:1.6em">5.1 Mark 3:28–29</a>

    > <sup style="font-weight:bold;">28</sup> “Truly, I say to you, all sins will be forgiven the children of man, and whatever blasphemies they utter, <sup style="font-weight:bold;">29</sup> but whoever blasphemes against the Holy Spirit never has forgiveness, but is guilty of an eternal sin” &mdash; <a href="#esvsb_cite">ESV Study Bible<sup>1</sup></a> 

<a name="mark" href="#contents" style="font-size:2.1em">🔥 VI. The Longer Ending Of Mark</a>

It's evident that whether or not the longer ending of mark is a legitimate part of the bible or not, no point of doctrine is affected by the absence or presence of vv. 9–20.<sup><a href="#esvsb_cite">1</a></sup>

- <a name="mss" href="#contents" style="font-size:1.6em">6.1 Missing From Oldest Manuscripts</a>

    > MARK—NOTE ON 16:9–20 “Longer Ending of Mark.” Some ancient manuscripts of Mark’s Gospel contain these verses and others do not, which presents a puzzle for scholars who specialize in the history of such manuscripts. This longer ending is missing from various old and reliable Greek manuscripts (esp. Sinaiticus and Vaticanus), as well as numerous early Latin, Syriac, Armenian, and Georgian manuscripts. <span style="font-weight:bold;color:GoldenRod;"><span style="font-size:1.2em;color:Gold;">Early church fathers</span> (e.g., Origen and Clement of Alexandria) <span style="font-size:1.2em;color:Gold;">did not</span> appear to <span style="font-size:1.2em;color:Gold;">know of these verses</span>.</span> <span style="font-weight:bold;color:GoldenRod;">Eusebius and Jerome state that this section is missing in most manuscripts available at their time.</span> <span style="font-weight:bold;color:GoldenRod;">And some manuscripts that contain vv. 9–20 indicate that older manuscripts lack the section.</span> On the other hand, some early and many later manuscripts (such as the manuscripts known as A, C, and D) contain vv. 9–20, and many church fathers (such as Irenaeus) evidently knew of these verses. As for the verses themselves, <span style="font-weight:bold;color:orangered;">they contain various Greek words and expressions <span style="font-size:1.2em;color:red;">uncommon to Mark</span>, and there are <span style="font-size:1.2em;color:red;">stylistic differences</span> as well.</span> Many think this shows vv. 9–20 to be a <span style="font-weight:bold;color:GoldenRod;">later addition</span>. In summary, vv. 9–20 should be read with caution. As in many translations, the editors of the esv have placed the section within brackets, showing their doubts as to whether it was originally part of what Mark wrote, but also recognizing its long history of acceptance by many in the church. The content of vv. 9–20 is best explained by reference to other passages in the Gospels and the rest of the NT. (Most of its content is found elsewhere, and no point of doctrine is affected by the absence or presence of vv. 9–20.) With particular reference to v. 18, <span style="font-weight:bold;color:GoldenRod;">there is no command to pick up serpents or to drink deadly poison</span>; there is merely a promise of protection as found in other parts of the NT (see Acts 28:3–4; James 5:13–16). (See The Reliability of the New Testament Manuscripts.) &mdash; <a href="#esvsb_cite">ESV Study Bible<sup>1</sup></a>

- <a name="condemned" href="#contents" style="font-size:1.6em">6.2 Never Says We’re Condemned</a>

    > ... whoever does not believe will be condemned.&rdquo; ... The very evident answer to this is simply to say that the verse <span style="font-weight:bold;color:orangered;">says nothing about those who believe <span style="font-size:1.2em;color:red;">and are not baptized</span></span>. &mdash; <a href="#grudem">Dr. Wayne Grudem (Ph.D., University of Cambridge; D.D., Westminster Theological Seminary)<sup>9</sup></a>

<a name="conclusion" href="#contents" style="font-size:2.1em">🔥 VII. Conclusion</a>

It is abundantly clear that baptism is not a requirement of salvation. Our obedience&mdash;water baptism, prayer, good works, fellowship, witnessing, etc.&mdash;issues forth from our faith in Christ. This is why Reformed theology stresses that true saving faith always **results** in obedience and good works **after justification**. We do not say that it **includes** obedience, because that would be works righteousness and no one will make it to heaven based on their own merits (Eph. 2:8-10; Gal. 2:21;5:4; Rom 3:20,28; Gal 2:16; 3:10-12). *Sola fide.*

> While we recognize that Jesus commanded baptism (Matt. 28:19), as did the apostles (Acts 2:38), we should not say that baptism is necessary for salvation. ... To say that baptism or any other action is necessary for salvation is to say that we are not justified by faith alone but by faith plus a certain "work," the work of baptism. The apostle Paul would have opposed the idea... Baptism, then, is not necessary for salvation, But it is necessary if we are to be obedient to Christ, for he commanded baptism for all who believe in him. &mdash; <a href="#grudem">Dr. Wayne Grudem (Ph.D., University of Cambridge; D.D., Westminster Theological Seminary)<sup>9</sup></a>

<br>

---

<br>

<a name="cite" href="#contents" style="font-size:2.1em;">Sources & Citations</a>

May be expanded or contracted as the article grows

<span style="color:#A8A8A8;">--- Study Bibles ---</span>

<sup><a name="esvsb_cite" href="#contents">1</a></sup> The [**ESV Study Bible**](https://amzn.to/3WsN0Uw) has over 200+ biblical scholars ([100+](https://www.esv.org/translation/) ESV; 95 Study); 9 countries, 20 denominations, 50 seminaries, colleges, and universities, including Universities of Cambridge, Oxford, London, Japan, California, MIT, Duke, Westminister, Dallas, etc. 20,000 study notes, 80,000 cross-references, 200+ charts, 50+ articles, 240 full-color maps and illustrations. Textual Basis: Masoretic Text BHS '83, DSS, LXX, SP, S, Vg; UBS5, NA28. Many distinguished scholars including:

<!--  -->

- [Dr. Wayne Grudem (Ph.D., Cambridge)](https://youtu.be/s9e3Y2SMXag)
- [Dr. J. I. Packer (Ph.D., Oxford)](https://youtu.be/jOFsFgUUdZo)
- [Dr. Robert Letham (Ph.D., Aberdeen)](https://www.greystoneinstitute.org/robert-letham)
- [Dr. Daniel B. Wallace (Ph.D., Dallas)](https://youtu.be/NikVdhp0YFs)
- [Dr. Darrell L. Bock (Ph.D., Dallas)]()
- [Dr. John Piper (D.Theol., Munich)]()
- [Dr. D. A. Carson (Ph.D., Cambridge)](https://www.crossway.org/authors/d-a-carson/)
- [Dr. Ron Rhodes (Th.D., Dallas)]()

<span style="color:#A8A8A8;">---</span>

<sup><a name="net_cite" href="#contents">2</a></sup> The [**NET Bible: Full Notes Edition**](https://amzn.to/3WLAgbr) is a completely new, non-sectarian and "inter-denominational," translation of the Bible with 60,932 translators’ notes, completed by more than <a href="https://netbible.com/preface/">25+ of the world’s foremost biblical scholars</a> from Universities of Cambridge, Oxford, Sheffield, Columbia, Dallas, etc. This is the largest set of translators’ notes ever created. Textual Basis: Masoretic Text BHS [B19<sup>A</sup>(L)], DSS; NA28, UBS4. Many distinguished scholars including:

<!--  -->

- [Dr. Daniel B. Wallace (Ph.D., Dallas)](https://youtu.be/NikVdhp0YFs)
- [Dr. Darrell L. Bock (Ph.D., Dallas)]()
- [Dr. W. Hall Harris III, (Ph.D., Sheffield)]()

<span style="color:#A8A8A8;">---</span>

<sup><a name="exb_cite" href="#contents">3</a></sup> The [**Expanded Bible (EXB)**](https://amzn.to/3vlMXy5) builds on the NCV which has [53 scholars](https://www.gotquestions.org/New-Century-Version-NCV.html), and expands inline, extraordinarily accurate and concise comments and literal renderings from [the following scholars](https://www.biblegateway.com/versions/Expanded-Bible-EXB/):

<!--  -->

- [Tremper Longman III (Ph.D., Yale)]()
    - Robert H. Gundry Professor of Biblical Studies at Westmont College.
- [Mark L. Strauss (Ph.D., Aberdeen)]()
    - Professor of New Testament at Bethel Seminary San Diego.
- [Daniel Taylor (Ph.D., Emory)]()

<span style="color:#A8A8A8;">---</span>


<sup><a name="logos_cite" href="#contents">4</a></sup> The [**Faithlife Study Bible**](https://www.logos.com/product/36338/faithlife-study-bible?ssi=0) is a state-of-the-art study created for Logos Bible Software&mdash;the world's most advanced biblical software&mdash;and is translation independent.

<!--  -->

- [Dr. Michael S. Heiser (PhD, University of Wisconsin)](https://www.youtube.com/@DRMSH)

<span style="color:#A8A8A8;">---</span>

<sup><a name="btsb_cite" href="#contents">5</a></sup> The [**NIV Biblical Theology Study Bible**](https://amzn.to/417o3A0), 165 scholars (100+ NIV; 65 Study); Universities of Cambridge, Oxford, Harvard, Yale, California, London, Belfast, Claremont, Denver, Westminister, & Dallas. 
    
<!--  -->

- [Dr. Tremper Longman III (Ph.D., Yale)]()
- [Dr. D. A. Carson (Ph.D., Cambridge)](https://www.crossway.org/authors/d-a-carson/)
- [Dr. Mark L. Strauss (Ph.D., Aberdeen)]()

<span style="color:#A8A8A8;">---</span>

<sup><a name="filament_cite" href="#contents">6</a></sup> The [**NLT Filament Study Bible**](https://amzn.to/3CcB5Cu) has [over 90+ Scholars](https://www.tyndale.com/nlt/meet-the-scholars) in translation from Universities of Cambridge, Oxford, Manchester, Columbia, Westminster, Dallas, etc. The study brings even more to the table. In addition to the NLT being the most readable Bible version on earth according to quantitative linguistic comparison of Bible translations using computerized statistical [analysis](/assets/docs/AnalysisGBI.pdf), many distinguished scholars are worth noting:

<!--  -->

- [Dr. Tremper Longman III (Ph.D., Yale)]()
- [Dr. Darrell L. Bock (Ph.D., Dallas)]()
- [Dr. D. A. Carson (Ph.D., Cambridge)](https://www.crossway.org/authors/d-a-carson/)
- [Dr. Robert H. Mounce (Ph.D., Aberdeen)](https://www.billmounce.com/), father of [Dr. William D. Mounce (Ph.D., Aberdeen)](https://www.billmounce.com/).

<span style="color:#A8A8A8;">---</span>

<sup><a name="tnsb_cite" href="#contents">7</a></sup> Commentary from [**NKJV Thomas Nelson Study Bible**](https://amzn.to/3Lqjw6W) is also excellent even if I have moved from the textus receptus to the critical text, the study remains excellent. The NKJV translation has [177 Scholars](https://www.zeolla.org/christian/versions/misc/translators.htm), and the study includes many others. This was my study bible in my young adulthood.

<!--  -->

- [Dr. Bruce M. Metzger (Ph.D., Princeton)]()
- [Dr. Darrell L. Bock (Ph.D., Dallas)]()

<span style="color:#A8A8A8;">--- Lexicons ---</span>

<sup><a name="BDAG" href="#contents">8</a></sup> [**BDAG Greek-English Lexicon, 3rd ed.**](https://amzn.to/3I4m4ES). This Lexicon is the world's most authoritative Greek lexicon. 

<!-- This specific cite is specific to entries [metanoéō (567)](/assets/images/greek/metanoeo.png) and [metánoia (567-568)](/assets/images/greek/metanoia.png). The scans were pulled from the 4th ed. -->

<span style="color:#A8A8A8;">--- Individuals ---</span>

<sup><a name="grudem" href="#contents">9</a></sup> [**Dr. Wayne Grudem**](https://youtu.be/s9e3Y2SMXag) (Ph.D., University of Cambridge; D.D., Westminster Theological Seminary), a distinguished Research Professor of Theology and Biblical Studies. He graduated Harvard, Westminister Seminary, and Cambridge. Member of the Translation Oversight Committee for the English Standard Version of the Bible, the general editor of the <a href="https://amzn.to/3WsN0Uw">ESV Study Bible</a>, and the author of over twenty-five books. This cite is specific to his [**Systematic Theology, 2nd ed.**](https://amzn.to/40QF8z5), Chapter 49 Baptism, pp. 1211-1212. D. The Necessity Of Baptism.

<span style="color:#A8A8A8;">---</span>

<sup><a name="packer" href="#contents">10</a></sup> [**Dr. J. I. Packer**](https://youtu.be/gExLXpPJDd8) (Ph.D., University of Oxford) Board of Governors' Professor of Theology, Regent College. He was a prolific writer, and he also served on the translation board of the <a href="https://amzn.to/3WsN0Uw">English Standard Version</a> of the Bible. The 2005 Time listed him as one of the 25 most influential evangelicals. During his time at Oxford, Packer attended lectures by C. S. Lewis, and hearing Lewis greatly affected his spiritual thinking. 

<!-- This cite is specific to <a href="https://amzn.to/3JOaVKp">Concise Theology. 88. UNPARDONABLE SIN - Only Impenitence Cannot Be Forgiven</a> -->

<span style="color:#A8A8A8;">---</span>

<sup><a name="carson" href="#contents">11</a></sup> [**Dr. D. A. Carson**](https://youtu.be/9OIxOq3aOIo) (Ph.D., University of Cambridge) is a Distinguished Emeritus Professor of New Testament at Trinity Evangelical Divinity School. Carson has been described as *"one of the last great Renaissance men in evangelical biblical scholarship,"* and as doing *"the most seminal New Testament work by contemporary evangelicals."*

<span style="color:#A8A8A8;">---</span>

<sup><a name="sproul" href="#contents">12</a></sup> [**Dr. R. C. Sproul**](https://youtu.be/-HMb9YjRq8Q) (Ph.D., Whitefield Theological Seminary) was an American Presbyterian pastor, theologian, author, apologist, Bible teacher, as well as founder and chairman of [Ligonier Ministries](https://www.youtube.com/@LigonierMinistries). He was Professor of theology and apologetics, and Senior Chair of Systematic Theology at Reformed Theological Seminary in Jackson, Mississippi, and distinguished Professor of Systematic Theology and Apologetics at Knox Theological Seminary in Ft. Lauderdale, Florida.

<span style="color:#A8A8A8;">---</span>

<sup><a name="piper" href="#contents">13</a></sup> [**Dr. John Piper**](https://youtu.be/tK_YIDMQuJc?t=215) (D.Theol., Munich) taught biblical studies at Bethel University for six years (1974–1980), before serving as pastor for preaching and vision of Bethlehem Baptist Church (Converge) in Minneapolis for 33 years (1980–2013).

<span style="color:#A8A8A8;">---</span>

<sup><a name="horton_cite" href="#contents">14</a></sup> [**Dr. Michael S. Horton**](https://youtu.be/_COhpzxavI4) (Ph.D., Oxford) has been the J. Gresham Machen Professor of Theology and Apologetics at Westminster Seminary California since 1998. He learned Biblical Hebrew and Koine Greek while studying under Meredith Kline at Westminster Seminary California for his M.A. Dr. Horton received his Ph.D. from Wycliffe Hall, Oxford through Coventry University and completed a research fellowship at Yale Divinity School. 

<span style="color:#A8A8A8;">---</span>

<sup><a name="demarest" href="#contents">15</a></sup> **Dr. Bruce Demarest** (Ph.D., University of Manchester) was senior professor of spiritual formation at Denver Seminary, where he taught since 1975, and a member of the Evangelical Theological Society, Theological Thinkers and Cultural Group, and Spiritual Formation Forum. 

<!-- This cite is specific to [The Cross and Salvation](https://amzn.to/3HMIbPZ). pp. 36-44. -->


<script>
    var refTagger = {
        settings: {
            bibleVersion: 'ESV'
        }
    }; 

    (function(d, t) {
        var n=d.querySelector('[nonce]');
        refTagger.settings.nonce = n && (n.nonce||n.getAttribute('nonce'));
        var g = d.createElement(t), s = d.getElementsByTagName(t)[0];
        g.src = 'https://api.reftagger.com/v2/RefTagger.js';
        g.nonce = refTagger.settings.nonce;
        s.parentNode.insertBefore(g, s);
    }(document, 'script'));
</script>