---
layout: post
title: "🆚 Lennox v. Grudem, Doctrine of Election"
date: 2023-09-25 1:25:00 -0500
categories: election salvation predestination
published: true
---

This article compares the minds of two intellectual titans, in an attempt to resolve once and for all, the conditionality or unconditionality of the doctrine of election. The verses I'd like to cover are as follows: Acts 13:48,2:23; Mt 22:14; Eph 1:4,11; Jn 15:16,18-19; Jn 6:44,65; Ro 8:29-30; 9:11-16; 1 Pe 1:2; Re 13:8; Lk 24:45; Jn 17:9, and Ro 10:9 + 1 Cor 12:3.

<a name="contents" style="font-size:2.1em;color:black;">Contents</a>

1. <a href="#faith">Is Election By Faith The Beginning Of Merit?</a>
- 1.1 <a href="#faith_lennox">Faith As Defined By Lennox</a>
- 1.2 <a href="#faith_grudem">Faith As Defined By Grudem</a>
- 1.3 <a href="#faith_analysis">Analysis</a>
2. <a href="#elect">Elected To Believe Or Elected Because Of Belief?</a>
- 2.1 <a href="#Acts13:48">Acts 13:48</a>
3. <a href="#cite">Sources & Citations</a>
- 3.1 <a href="#lennox">Dr. John C. Lennox (PhD, DPhil, DSc)</a>
- 3.2 <a href="#grudem">Dr. Wayne Grudem (PhD, DD)</a>

<!-- - II. <a href="#thief">The Thief On The Cross</a>
    - 2.1 <a href="#Luke23:43">Luke 23:43</a>
    - 2.2 <a href="#cross">The Cross Is Enough</a> -->

<a name="faith" href="#contents" style="font-size:2.1em">💡 1. Is Election By Faith The Beginning Of Salvation Of Merit?</a>

> Under construction

- <a name="faith_lennox" href="#contents" style="font-size:1.6em">1.1 The Definition Of Faith According To Lennox</a>

    > According to the Oxford English Dictionary the word “faith” derives from the Latin fides (from which we get “fidelity”), so its basic meaning is “trust” or “reliance”. The Greek etymological equivalent is pistis, which is found in the New Testament where it has the following principal senses:
    >
    1. belief, trust;
    2. that which produces belief, evidence, token, pledge, engagement;
    3. trust in its objective aspect, troth, observance of trust, fidelity.
    >
    So the main dictionary meanings given to “faith” are: belief, trust, confidence, reliance, and belief proceeding from testimony or authority. It is to be strongly affirmed that the faith in God described in the Bible is “reliance and belief proceeding from testimony or authority”. **Biblical faith is evidence-based.** &mdash; Dr. John C. Lennox (PhD, University of Cambridge; DPhil, Emeritus Professor of Mathematics at the University of Oxford; DSc, Cardiff University), [*Determined to Believe?*](). p. 136.

    --

    > **Real faith in Christ shows itself by its fruit in the lives of those who profess it.** It is not a superficial thing. One of its evidences is a deepening commitment to the word of Christ. A disciple is a learner. The hallmark of a true disciple is a readiness to learn more and more of the truth, thereby discovering that knowledge of truth leads to freedom. Genuine faith perseveres. &mdash; Dr. John C. Lennox (PhD, University of Cambridge; DPhil, Emeritus Professor of Mathematics at the University of Oxford; DSc, Cardiff University), [*Determined to Believe?*](). On John 8:31–47. p. 218.

    --

    > A second way of knowing that we have eternal life is **by observing the spiritual and moral outworking of our faith in our behaviour**:
    >> We know that we have come to know him if we obey his commands. The man who says, “I know him,” but does not do what he commands is a liar, and the truth is not in him. (1 John 2:3–4.)
    >
    >>We know that we have passed from death to life, because we love our brothers. Anyone who does not love remains in death. (1 John 3:14.)
    >
    Jesus made a similar point when he said, **by their fruit you will recognise them (Matthew 7:20)**. **If there is no moral consistency between our lives and our professed belief in God, then our claim to know God will not be credible.** It is in this context that Peter exhorts his readers to make your calling and election sure by our development of Christian character and moral virtues. The phrase “making sure” means “confirming”. That is, the development of visible Christian moral virtues in **a person’s life confirms the genuineness of their claim to be believers. True faith in God will be evidenced by its moral consequences in the life of a believer.** &mdash; Dr. John C. Lennox (PhD, University of Cambridge; DPhil, Emeritus Professor of Mathematics at the University of Oxford; DSc, Cardiff University), [*Determined to Believe?*](). p. 313.

- <a name="faith_grudem" href="#contents" style="font-size:1.6em">1.2 The Definition Of Faith According To Grudem</a>

    > I believe <span style="font-weight:bold;color:#009933;">saving faith will <span style="font-size:1.2em;color:#00cc44;">result</span> in obedience</span>... We must guard jealously the fact that <span style="font-weight:bold;">faith alone is what saves us, <span style="color:orangered;">not faith <span style="font-size:1.2em;color:red;">plus</span> obedience</span></span>. ... No historic Protestant confession says that saving faith includes obedience. &mdash; Dr. Wayne Grudem (Ph.D., Cambridge; D.D., Westminster), "Free Grace" Theology: 5 Ways It Diminishes the Gospel. p. 71.

    In the 14th verse of the 2nd chapter of the book of James in the Bible, we find that if a person has no good works, and that if there is no change in his life, then that person has a ***"dead faith"***&mdash;and verse 14 implies that that kind of faith cannot save a person. 

    > <sup style="font-weight:bold;">14</sup> What good is it, my brothers, if **someone** says he has faith but does not have works? <span style="font-weight:bold;color:orangered;">Can that faith <span style="font-size:1.2em;color:red;">save him</span>?</span> <sup style="font-weight:bold;">15</sup> If a brother or sister is poorly clothed and lacking in daily food, <sup style="font-weight:bold;">16</sup> and one of you says to them, “Go in peace, be warmed and filled,” without giving them the things needed for the body, what good is that? <sup style="font-weight:bold;">17</sup> So also <span style="font-weight:bold;color:orangered;">faith by itself, if it does not have works, <span style="font-size:1.2em;color:red;">is dead</span></span>. &mdash; James 2:14-17 ESV
    >> <sup>2</sup>The Greek interrogative particle <span style="font-weight:bold;color:teal;">mē</span> at the beginning of the sentence indicates that **the author expects a negative answer** to the question. ... <span style="font-weight:bold;color:orangered;">If a person has no good works, if there is no change in his life, then he has a <span style="font-size:1.2em;color:red;">&ldquo;dead faith&rdquo;</span></span>&mdash;and verse 14 implies that <span style="font-weight:bold;color:orangered;">that kind of faith cannot save a person</span>. &mdash; Dr. Wayne Grudem (Ph.D., Cambridge; D.D., Westminster Theological Seminary), "Free Grace" Theology: 5 Ways It Diminishes the Gospel. pp. 79-80.
    >>
    >> It's important to recognize that <span style="font-weight:bold;color:orangered;">these warnings were written not to people outside the church <span style="font-size:1.2em;color:red;">but to people who would be listening to the New Testament epistles as they were read aloud in New Testament Churches</span></span> (cf. 1 Cor. 6:9-11; 2 Cor. 13:5; Heb. 3:12; 1 Jn 2:3-6; 3:6, 9-10; 14) &mdash; Dr. Wayne Grudem (Ph.D., Cambridge; D.D., Westminster Theological Seminary), "Free Grace" Theology: 5 Ways It Diminishes the Gospel. pp. 79-82.
    
    Pay attention to the context of whom James is speaking; James is not talking about all of his readers or even most of his readers, he is talking about *"someone"* which is distinguished from *"my brothers."* James continues speaking in context to eternal salvation.

    >> In addition, <span style="color:#A8A8A8">[critics]</span> fail to consider that <span style="font-weight:bold;color:orangered;">whenever the Greek word sózó&mdash;&ldquo;save,deliver&rdquo;&mdash;is used in the New Testament, <span style="font-size:1.2em;color:red;">it always refers to eternal salvation</span></span> except where the context specifies of a situation of rescue from physical danger or healing from physical sickness (as in James 5:15 or Matt. 8:25; 9:22, for example). But there is no such contextual specification in James 2:14-17. Therefore we are correct to understand it as referring to eternal salvation, which is consistent with its usage in every other New Testament context ...  &mdash; Dr. Wayne Grudem (Ph.D., Cambridge; D.D., Westminster Theological Seminary), "Free Grace" Theology: 5 Ways It Diminishes the Gospel. pp. 132-134.

    > <sup style="font-weight:bold;">20</sup> Do you want to be shown, you foolish person, that faith apart from works is useless? ... <sup style="font-weight:bold;">24</sup> You see that a person is justified by works and not by faith alone. ... <sup style="font-weight:bold;">26</sup> For as the body apart from the spirit is dead, so also <span style="font-weight:bold;color:orangered;">faith apart from works <span style="font-size:1.2em;color:red;">is dead</span></span>. &mdash; James 2:20,24,26 ESV
    >> This same consideration regarding the use of the Greek term sózó also weighs heavily against <span style="color:#A8A8A8">[critics]</span> interpretation of <span style="color:#A8A8A8">[James 2:26]</span> &mdash; Dr. Wayne Grudem (Ph.D., Cambridge; D.D., Westminster Theological Seminary), "Free Grace" Theology: 5 Ways It Diminishes the Gospel. pp. 132-136.

    The context shows that James was referring to showing one’s faith through doing good deeds. This is not to be confused with Paul (Rom 3:20, 28; Gal 2:16; 3:10–12) when he was referring to “works” (erga) of Jewish law.

- <a name="faith_analysis" href="#contents" style="font-size:1.6em">1.3 Faith is a universal God-given ability</a>

    Both Lennox & Grudem believe that salvation is by grace through faith alone (Eph 2:8-9; Gal 2:16,21; 3:10-12; 5:4; Ro 3:20,28), but they also agree that [the faith that saves is never alone in the person justified (James 2:14-26; Eph 2:10)](https://sevenshepherd.github.io/faith-alone/).
    
    They both acknowledge that faith "results" in obedience to God (Jn 14:15,21; 15:10; 1 Jn 2:3-6; 5:3-4) and good works that "follow after" justification (James 2:14-26; Eph 2:10), that Faith is a trust and reliance in Christ for salvation, which is juxtaposed to the false teaching that it's a minor opinion change or an intellectual assent to facts, which is not salvific (James 2:19).

    **So there isn't a disagreement on what genuine faith looks like**, but whether or not viewing faith in a certain light is the beginning of salvation by merit (or good works) if we deny unconditional election in favor of conditional.

    > For instance, J. I. Packer and O. R. Johnson in their introduction to Luther’s Bondage of the Will say that, in Reformed eyes, “to rely on oneself for faith is no different in principle from relying on oneself for works”.89 Wayne Grudem similarly writes: “Election based on something good in us (our faith) would be the beginning of salvation by merit.”90 Th e only way out of this, he argues, is to hold that faith itself must be a gift of God distributed according to his sovereign will, completely independent of any attitude, desire, or behaviour on the part of those he elects to save. This view, as we have seen, is called “unconditional election” – an expression that does not actually appear in Scripture itself. &mdash; Dr. John C. Lennox (PhD, University of Cambridge; DPhil, Emeritus Professor of Mathematics at the University of Oxford; DSc, Cardiff University), [*Determined to Believe?*](). p. 130.

<br>

---

<br>

<a name="elect" href="#contents" style="font-size:2.1em">💡 2. Do Only The Elect Believe Or Are Those Who Believe The Elect?</a>
# Will only those elected to salvation believe or does God elect unto salvation based upon his foreknowledge of your faith?

There are many verses that prove that election is in the Bible, so it's not a matter of whether or not Christians believe in predestination, we all do, it a matter of how we understand how election is applied to believers that differ.

- <a name="Acts13:48" href="#contents" style="font-size:1.6em">📜 2.1 Acts 13:48</a>

    > <sup style="font-weight:bold;">48</sup> When the Gentiles heard this, they began to rejoice and praise the word of the Lord, and <span style="font-weight:bold;">all who had been appointed for eternal life believed</span>. &mdash; Acts 13:48 NET

<span style="font-size:1.6em">⚠️ Under Construction</span>

This article is under construction. Refresh weekly for updates.

<br>

---

<br>

<a name="cite" href="#contents" style="font-size:2.1em;">Sources & Citations</a>

<sup><a name="lennox" href="#contents">1</a></sup> [**Dr. John C. Lennox**]() (PhD, University of Cambridge; DPhil, Emeritus Professor of Mathematics at the University of Oxford; DSc, Cardiff University) is Emeritus Professor of Mathematics at the University of Oxford and an Emeritus Fellow in Mathematics and Philosophy of Science at Green Templeton College, Oxford University. He attended The Royal School, Armagh, and went on to become Exhibitioner and Senior Scholar at Emmanuel College, Cambridge, where in 1962 he also attended the last lectures of C. S. Lewis. Lennox obtained Master of Arts and Doctor of Philosophy degrees at the University of Cambridge with the dissertation Centrality and Permutability in Soluble Groups (1970). He was awarded a Doctor of Science degree in mathematics by Cardiff University for his research. Lennox also holds a Doctor of Philosophy degree from the University of Oxford (by incorporation) and an M.A. degree in bioethics at the University of Surrey. 

> I suspect that some of my readers are already trying to shoehorn me
into a pigeonhole, labelled, shall we say, Calminian. I would courteously ask them not to do that. Dr. John C. Lennox (PhD, University of Cambridge; DPhil, Emeritus Professor of Mathematics at the University of Oxford; DSc, Cardiff University), [*Determined to Believe?*](). p. 74.

--

<sup><a name="grudem" href="#contents">2</a></sup> [**Dr. Wayne Grudem**](https://youtu.be/s9e3Y2SMXag) (PhD, University of Cambridge; DD, Westminster Theological Seminary), a distinguished Research Professor of Theology and Biblical Studies. He graduated Harvard, Westminister Seminary, and Cambridge. Member of the Translation Oversight Committee for the English Standard Version of the Bible, the general editor of the ESV Study Bible, and the author of over twenty-five books. Dr. Grudem identifies as a 5-Point Orthodox Calvinist, likely of the unequal ultimacy, infralapsarian, variety. He's also the author of the text &ldquo;Systematic Theology&rdquo; from which this article cites: 2nd ed. Chapter 32 Election and Reprobation, pp. 816-837.

<script>
    var refTagger = {
        settings: {
            bibleVersion: 'ESV'
        }
    }; 

    (function(d, t) {
        var n=d.querySelector('[nonce]');
        refTagger.settings.nonce = n && (n.nonce||n.getAttribute('nonce'));
        var g = d.createElement(t), s = d.getElementsByTagName(t)[0];
        g.src = 'https://api.reftagger.com/v2/RefTagger.js';
        g.nonce = refTagger.settings.nonce;
        s.parentNode.insertBefore(g, s);
    }(document, 'script'));
</script>
