---
layout: post
title: "⛓️ I proclaim in the name of Christ Jesus that ‘There is forgiveness of sins for all who repent.’ Repent therefore, and turn back, that your sins may be blotted out."
date: 2024-03-18 05:55:00 -0500
categories: sin
published: true
---

The title of this article takes from two verses (Lk 24:47; Ac 3:19).

<a name="contents" style="font-size:2.1em;color:black;">Contents</a>

1. <a href="#definition">The Definition of Sin</a>
2. <a href="#all-have-sinned">Who Is a Sinner?</a>
3. <a href="#list-of-sins">A List of Sins</a>
4. <a href="#wages-of-sin">What Happens To Sinners?</a>
5. <a href="#repent-faith">How Do I Escape?</a>
6. <a href="#conclusion">Conclusion</a>

<a name="definition" href="#contents" style="font-size:1.6em">⛓️ 1. The Definition of Sin</a>

**Sin is any failure to conform to the moral law of God in act, attitude, or nature.** It is defined in relation to God and his moral law. Scripturally, it is defined in relationship to God’s law and his moral character. John tells us that “sin is lawlessness” (1 John 3:4).

There are at least three types of sin: inherited sin (Psalm 51:5), imputed sin (Romans 5:18), and personal sin.

<a name="all-have-sinned" href="#contents" style="font-size:1.6em">⛓️ 2. All Have Sinned And Fallen Short Of The Glory Of God</a>

All have sinned and fallen short of the glory of God.

> for all have sinned and fall short of the glory of God. &mdash; Romans 3:23 NET

<a name="list-of-sins" href="#contents" style="font-size:1.6em">⛓️ 3. A List Of Sins</a>

The Books of Revelation 21:8; 22:15; Romans 1:29-32; 1 Corinthians 6:9-10; Galatians 5:19-21; and Ephesians 5:3-5 paint a comprehensive picture of those who are damned for all eternity.

> Some of you once lived this way. But you were washed, you were sanctified, you were justified in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ and by the Spirit of our God. &mdash; 1 Corinthians 6:11 NET

- Sins of a verbal nature (Proverbs 18:21)
    - *Backbiters*&mdash;those who constantly find fault with others and speak maliciously about them. (Ro 1:30 NKJV; Mt 12:36 ESV)
    - *Dogs*&mdash;false professors (2Pe 2:21-22)
    - *Liars*&mdash;also bearing false witness (John 8:44; Proverbs 6:16-19)
    - *Maligners*&mdash;those who speak evil of, defame, or **slander** others (Ro 14:10-11 NIV; Jas 3:2-3; Pr 11:9; Jas 4:11-12; Pr 10:18 ESV; 20:19; 1Pe 2:1; Ps 101:5 ESV; Pr 11:12; Mt 5:22 ESV; Lk 6:45).
    - *Whisperers*&mdash;those who gossip (Proverbs 16:28).
    - *Revilers*&mdash;those who use abusive or contemptuous language (Jas 1:26; 1Co 6:10).
- Prideful & arrogant (this isn't speaking of confidence)
    - *The Proud*&mdash;those possessing an excessively high opinion of themselves.
    - *Boasters*&mdash;those who exalt self.
- False religions, cults, and occultists
    - *Dogs*&mdash;false professors (2Pe 2:21-22)
    - *Idolaters*&mdash;those who worship or reverence anything other than the living and true God.
    - *Sorcerers*&mdash;those who practice witchcraft, demonism, and follow after the occult. Sorcery comes from the Greek word [pharmakeía](https://www.gotquestions.org/pharmakeia-in-the-Bible.html), meaning *"enchantment with drugs."* Thus, drug users as well as pushers are included in the guilty verdict for judgement (Re 21:8; 22:15; Gal 5:19-21).
    - *The unrighteous*&mdash;those who trust in self, works, a false religious system, or mere *"religion"* for salvation (Titus 3:5).
    - *Those without understanding*&mdash;resulting from unconcern or rejection of truth. (Ro 1:31)
- Drug abusers & pushers
    - *Magic Spells/Sorcerers*&mdash;those who practice witchcraft, demonism, and follow after the occult. Sorcery comes from the Greek word [pharmakeía](https://www.gotquestions.org/pharmakeia-in-the-Bible.html), meaning *"enchantment with drugs."* Thus, drug users as well as pushers are included in the guilty verdict for judgement (Re 21:8; 22:15; Gal 5:19-21).
    - *Inventors of evil things*&mdash;
    - *Drunkards*&mdash;those given to and overcome by alcohol (Pr 20:1; 23:20-21; Lk 21:34; Ro 13:13; 1Co 6:10; Gal 5:19-21; Eph 5:18).
- Eternity is a long time to be wrong ...
    - *Debaters*&mdash;those who would rather argue with God than accept His truth.
    - *Despisers*&mdash;those filled with contempt toward God and man.
    - *Haters of God*&mdash;self-explanatory
    - *Those without understanding*&mdash;resulting from unconcern or rejection of truth. (Ro 1:31)
    - *The implacable*&mdash;those exhibiting extreme stubbornness to the point of refusing to yield to the convicting power of the Holy Spirit (Pr 1:24-28; Ac 7:51-52)
    - *Unbelievers*&mdash;those who do not believe in and receive the Lord Jesus Christ (Jn 8:24; Mt 12:32; Jn 3:36).
- Violent & Murderous
    - *Inventors of evil things*&mdash;
    - *Murderers*&mdash;those who kill others or ***hate*** as hatred is equivalent to murder (1Jn 3:15; 1Jn 2:9; 1Jn 4:20).
    - *Detestable/The abominable*&mdash;those who engage in wicked practices (Titus 1:16).
    - *The malicious*&mdash;those who willfully seek to destroy the person and property of others (Jas 1:26)
    - *The wicked*&mdash;those who disregard all morality and moral standards.
    - *Extortioners*&mdash;those who exact money from or take advantage of others through violence, threats, or misuse of authority.
- Sexually Immoral
    - *Adulterers*&mdash;those who practice extramarital sex (1Co 6:9-10)
    - *Sexually Immoral/Whoremongers*&mdash;those who engage in fornication or consort with prostitutes (Eph 5:5-8).
    - *Fornicators*&mdash;those who engage in premarital and extramarital sex (1Co 6:9,14-18).
    - *The effeminate*&mdash;generally younger persons in the process of becoming homosexuals or sodomites.
    - *Homosexuals*&mdash;[same sex relations](https://www.gotquestions.org/homosexuality-Bible.html) (1Co 6:9; 1Ti 1:10; Gen. 19:1–13; Lev. 18:22; 20:13; Ro 1:26–27)
    - *Abusers of themselves with mankind*&mdash;hardened homosexuals (Gen. 19:5).
    - *Those whose affections are contrary to the laws of God and nature*&mdash;
- Other sinful behavior
    - *The covetous*&mdash;those who desire all things for themselves, especially that which belongs to others (Eph 5:5-8).
    - *The envious*&mdash;those resentful of others (Mt 27:18; 1Pe 2:1; Jas 3:16; Pr 14:30 ESV; Pr 27:4; 1Co 13:4; Gal 5:26).
    - *Deceivers*&mdash;those who purposely mislead or betray others (2Ti 3:13).
    - *Covenant breakers*&mdash;those who do not keep their word.
    - *The unmerciful*&mdash;those who lack compassion (Eph 4:32)
    - *Cowards/The fearful*&mdash;those who do not accept Christ to escape being ridiculed (Matthew 10:32).
    - *The disobedient to parents*&mdash;(Eph 6:1–2)
    - *Thieves*&mdash;(1Co 6:10)

<a name="wages-of-sin" href="#contents" style="font-size:1.6em">⛓️ 4. The Wages Of Sin Is Death</a>

We receive a wage for our sins, and that wage is death. The only just penalty for this sin is death (Romans 6:23), not just physical death but eternal death (Revelation 20:11-15). 

There is a lake which burns with fire and brimstone (Re 21:8); where the worm dies not and the fire is not quenched, and the smoke of the torment of those who end up their will ascend up for ever and ever (Mk 9:48; Rv. 14:11 KJV).

> For the wages of sin is death, but the free gift of God is eternal life in Christ Jesus our Lord. &mdash; Romans 6:23 ESV
>
>> a. Romans 6:23 tn &ldquo;A figurative extension of ὀψώνιον (opsōnion), which refers to a soldier’s pay or wages. Here it refers to the end result of an activity, seen as something one receives back in return. In this case the activity is sin, and the translation “payoff” captures this thought. See also L&N 89.42.&rdquo; &mdash; NET FUll Notes

<a name="repent-faith" href="#contents" style="font-size:1.6em">⛓️ 5. How To Escape The Fires of Hell</a>

The message that &lsquo;*There is forgiveness of sins for all who repent.*&rsquo; should be preached to the entire world in the name of Jesus Christ (Luke 24:47; Acts 2:38; 3:19; 5:31).

> The call to repent was the first and fundamental summons in the preaching of John the Baptist (Matt. 3:2), Jesus (Matt. 4:17), the Twelve (Mark 6:12), Peter at Pentecost (Acts 2:38), Paul to the Gentiles (Acts 17:30; 26:20), and the glorified Christ to five of the seven churches in Asia (Rev. 2:5, 16, 22; 3:3, 19). It was part of Jesus’ summary of the gospel that was to be taken to the world (Luke 24:47). 
>
>&mdash; Dr. J. I. Packer (PhD, University of Oxford), Concise Theology. 60. Repentance: A Christian Changes Radically. On [faith](https://youtu.be/jOFsFgUUdZo), on [repentance](https://youtu.be/gExLXpPJDd8).

The Bible teaches that we should repent, turn away from our sin, and put our trust in the person of Christ Jesus. He has paid for our redemption with His blood, He is deserving of your trust (Jn 3:16), He is worthy of your love (Jn 14:15,21). Repentance is the &ldquo;*resulting*&rdquo; fruit of genuine saving faith. Repentance is a heartfelt sorrow for sin, a renouncing of it, and a sincere commitment to forsake it and walk in obedience to Christ.

> The gospel can be summarized in different ways. Sometimes faith alone is named as the one thing necessary for salvation (see John 3:16; Acts 16:31; Rom. 10:9; Eph. 2:8–9), other times repentance alone is named (Luke 24:47; Acts 3:19; 5:31; 17:30; 2 Cor. 7:10), and sometimes both are named (Acts 20:21). <span style="font-weight:bold;color:ForestGreen;">Genuine faith always involves repentance</span>, and vice versa. &mdash; ESV Study Bible (Excerpt from Acts 2:38)

Justification is by faith alone (Eph 2:8-10; Rom 3:28), but the faith that saves is never alone in the person justified (1Jn 2:3-6; 3:6-10; 5:3-4 Jn 14:15,21; 15:10). Obedience does not merit salvation, salvation produces obedience (Ac 17:30; 1Jn 2:4).

> **Repentance is a turning from sin to God** (Deut 30:1-2; 2 Chron 6:26-27; 7:14; Neh 1:9; Ps 78:34; Isa 55:7; Jer 8:6; 31:18-19; Ezek 18:21; Mal 3:7; Matt 11:20-21; Luke 15:7; 16:30; Acts 3:19; 8:22; 14:15; 26:19-20; Rev 9:20-21). The open demonstration of this turning to God is sometimes **called conversion** (Acts 15:3; cf. 26:17-18; 1 Thess 1:9-10). Jesus and New Testament preachers commanded people to repent, because **without repentance there can be no salvation** (Matt 3:2; 4:17; Mark 6:12; Luke 5:32; 13:3; 24:47; Acts 2:38; 11:18; 17:30).
>
>It is true that faith is the means by which people receive salvation (Rom 3:22-25; Eph 2:8), but **faith that does not involve repentance is not true faith**. It is not a faith that leads to salvation. Faith means complete trust in Jesus Christ and his atoning death. It means that a person has total dependance on Christ for his entire salvation (see FAITH). But such trust is impossible so long as a person still clings to anything of himself. He cannot rely upon the work of Christ for the forgiveness of sin unless he turns from that sin (Mark 1:15; Acts 11:21; 20:21; 26:18; 1 Thess 1:9).
>
>Because faith involves repentance and repentance involves faith, the Bible in some places speaks of forgiveness as depending on faith (Acts 10:43; 13:38-39), in others as depending on repentance (Luke 24:47; Acts 3:19,26). But the preaching of repentance to the death and resurrection of Jesus Christ (Luke 24:46-47).
>
>&mdash; AMG Concise Bible Dictionary

<a name="conclusion" href="#contents" style="font-size:1.6em">🔓 6. Conclusion</a>

All sin has been crucified on the cross of Christ Jesus, and [**faith is now the instrument by which we lay hold of His saving grace**](https://sevenshepherd.github.io/faith-instrument/). In Jesus Christ as Lord and Savior *“we have redemption through His blood, the forgiveness of sins, according to the riches of His grace”* (Ephesians 1:7).

- Justification is by faith alone (Eph 2:8-10; Gal 2:16,21; 3:10-12; 5:4; Ro 3:20,28), but the faith that saves is never alone in the person justified (1Jn 2:3-6; 3:6-10; 5:3-4 Jn 14:15,21; 15:10). 
- Everyone sins (1 Jn 1:8–10), but not everyone pursues lifestyles of sin (1Jn 3:6-10). Though we may stumble, make mistakes, and God forbid backslide, there is no such thing as a born again Christian that &ldquo;*practices*&rdquo; sin.
- We are set free from sin, but not set free to sin (1 Jn 3:6-10; 5:18; Jd 4 NET; Ro 6:1-2,15; 3:8,31; Heb 10:26-31; 6:4-6; Lk 9:62). 
- We are no longer under the law (Ro 6:1-2,14-15; Gal 3:23-25; Gal 5:18; Col 2:14), but we still uphold the law (Romans 3:31). Imagine discarding morality and having the audacity to call yourself a follower of Christ (Mt 10:38; Lk 9:23)
- Repentance is the &ldquo;*resulting*&rdquo; fruit of genuine saving faith. Repentance is a heartfelt sorrow for sin, a renouncing of it, and a sincere commitment to forsake it and walk in obedience to Christ.
- Obedience does not merit salvation, salvation produces obedience (Ac 17:30; 1Jn 2:4).
- Faith is not a work (Romans 4:5), and repentance is a fruit (Mt 3:8-10 NLT).

<!-- [**Repent**](https://sevenshepherd.github.io/repentance/) (Lk 13:3; Ac 17:30; 1Jn 2:4), turn to Christ (Ac 3:19; 26:20), put your trust in Him for justification (Eph 2:8-10; Rom 3:28), and know that no one born of God practices or pursues lifestyles of sin, habitually or continually (1 Jn 3:6-10; 5:18; Jd 4 NET; Ro 6:1-2,15; 3:8,31; Heb 10:26-31; 6:4-6; Lk 9:62). If your faith is genuine (2Cor.13:5), and you truly abide in Christ, you will bear fruit (Jn 15:1-17), you will not practice these things. -->

<br>

---

<br>

> “The words of the wise are like cattle prods—**painful but helpful**. Their collected sayings are like a nail-studded stick with which <span style="font-weight:bold;color:ForestGreen;">a shepherd drives the sheep</span>.” ― Ecclesiastes 12:11

<script>
    var refTagger = {
        settings: {
            bibleVersion: 'ESV'
        }
    }; 

    (function(d, t) {
        var n=d.querySelector('[nonce]');
        refTagger.settings.nonce = n && (n.nonce||n.getAttribute('nonce'));
        var g = d.createElement(t), s = d.getElementsByTagName(t)[0];
        g.src = 'https://api.reftagger.com/v2/RefTagger.js';
        g.nonce = refTagger.settings.nonce;
        s.parentNode.insertBefore(g, s);
    }(document, 'script'));
</script>