---
layout: post
title: "🗡️ “These people are the ones who are creating divisions among you. They follow their natural instincts because they do not have God’s Spirit in them” — Jude"
date: 2024-09-18 02:05:00 -0500
categories: division
published: true
---

<!-- Christianity is a call to discipleship (**Mt 10:38 NLT**; Mt 16:24; **Lk 9:23** Lk 9:62; **Lk 14:27**; Mk 8:34... Jn 15:8 ESV; Mt 3:10; 25:30). ***&ldquo;choose this day whom you will serve&rdquo;*** (Jos 24:15). Will it be the God of the Bible who taught that repentance is a turning away from sin (Acts 3:26; cf. Ac 3:19) produced by Godly contrition (2Cor 7:10)? -->

<!-- “I have not come to bring peace, but a sword.” — Jesus" -->

<a name="Division-Paradox" href="#contents" style="font-size:2.1em;">The Division Paradox</a>

<!-- If people are causing divisions among you, it's very likely they are not indwelt by the Holy Spirit (Jd 1:19). Give a first and second warning. After that, have nothing more to do with them (Ti 3:10). -->

There's yet another paradox to cover here. Those who are divisive are likely false converts (Jd 19), but at the same time the Bible tells us that there is a time to divide (Mt 10:34-40).

> <sup style="font-weight:bold;">19</sup> These people are the ones who are creating divisions among you. They follow their natural instincts <span style="font-weight:bold;color:GoldenRod;">because they do not have God’s Spirit in them</span>. &mdash; Jude 1:19

The difference is, being divisive in the sense of false profession, is when people never stop harassing you, or indoctrinating you, or bearing false witness against you. I can remember being slandered viciously by the lead worship leader of my local church, as false witness was brought against me. This is a good example of division as a negative. Even after several years of verbal assault, I still desire to fellowship with this individual, unfortunately I could endure abuse no longer. Another instance was being slandered and attacked by an individual lost in one of the various heretical sects. Eventually, after begin attacked randomly in person and through text in what seemed to be a drunken stupor, I had to employ Titus 3:10. In both instances false witness was bared against me and many false rumors went out and relationships damaged by said individual when I had done nothing but show kindness.

<!-- These are the people who are usually lost in cults and heretical sects, who always push materials, other than the Bible or lexicons, to indoctrinate you. They pray obsessively with these false teachers and their false systems on a daily basis and will use every opportunity to push them on you until you have to avoid them. -->

> <sup style="font-weight:bold;">10</sup> If people are causing divisions among you, give a first and second warning. After that, <span style="font-weight:bold;color:GoldenRod;">have nothing more to do with them</span>. &mdash; Titus 3:10

Cutting them off and dividing from divisive people seems to be encouraged after a couple warnings. Christ Himself came to bring a sword. This simply means, that for those of you who understand the truth, your parents may even come against you, I want to encourage you to side with truth in that circumstance. It's been almost a year now from the second instance, and while they still challenge sound teachings and attempt to forcefully indoctrinate, the distance prescribed by God has been therapeutic to me. Anyone who knows me knows that I do not directly engage or harass others like these other individuals do. This gives me a great sense of peace to be on the correct side.

> <sup style="font-weight:bold;">34</sup> “Do not think that I have come to bring peace to the earth. <span style="font-weight:bold;color:GoldenRod;">I have not come to bring peace, but a sword.</span> <sup style="font-weight:bold;">35</sup> For I have come to set a man against his father, and a daughter against her mother, and a daughter-in-law against her mother-in-law. <sup style="font-weight:bold;">36</sup> And a person's enemies will be those of his own household. <sup style="font-weight:bold;">37</sup> <span style="font-weight:bold;color:GoldenRod;">Whoever loves father or mother more than me is not worthy of me</span>, and whoever loves son or daughter more than me is not worthy of me. <sup style="font-weight:bold;">38</sup> <span style="font-weight:bold;color:GoldenRod;">And whoever does not take his cross and follow me is not worthy of me.</span> 39 Whoever finds his life will lose it, and whoever loses his life for my sake will find it. — Jesus in Matthew 10:34-40

If they [repent, which means to feel remorse and turn away from what they are doing](https://sevenshepherd.github.io/repentance/), you are to forgive them and give them another opportunity (Lk 17:3-4). Just remember, true repentance is contrition not attrition. It lasts.


- It's **not** divisive to rebuke those in the Church who are sinning (1Cor 5:11,12-13).
- It's **not** divisive to scrutinize man-made systems as the Bible tells us to test all things (1Thes. 5:21).
- It is divisive to slander and bare false witness against your neighbor (Pr 10:18; Pr 20:19 ESV; Ps 101:5 ESV)
- It is divisive to harass and forcefully indoctrinate others into your man-made system.
- Finally, deviations from sound doctrines are divisions. [Calvinism](https://sevenshepherd.github.io/hierarchy-of-authority/), Arminianism, [Chaferanism](https://sevenshepherd.github.io/free-grace-theology/) are all divisions with false elements to their teachings (1Cor 1:12-13).

If something challenges established doctrine (e.g. [repentance as a turn](https://sevenshepherd.github.io/repent-means-turn/), or faith as trust), this new challenger group is the target of verses like Titus 3:8-11, 1Tim 6:3-4, and 2Tim 4:3-4 NET. The defender (me in this instance) is only fulfilling his mandate and upholding established truths that have been taught for thousands of years, as we're commissioned to do.

Even now there are misled pastors who have been told many lies and rumors about innocent individuals, and they have not cared to hear their side of the story. When they act on only part of the truth they are contributing to Satan's cause.

> A false balance is an abomination to the Lord, but a just weight is his delight. &mdash; Proverbs 11:1

<br>

---

<br>

> “The words of the wise are like cattle prods—painful but helpful. Their collected sayings are like a nail-studded stick with which a shepherd drives the sheep.” ― Ecclesiastes 12:11

<script>
    var refTagger = {
        settings: {
            bibleVersion: 'NLT'
        }
    }; 

    (function(d, t) {
        var n=d.querySelector('[nonce]');
        refTagger.settings.nonce = n && (n.nonce||n.getAttribute('nonce'));
        var g = d.createElement(t), s = d.getElementsByTagName(t)[0];
        g.src = 'https://api.reftagger.com/v2/RefTagger.js';
        g.nonce = refTagger.settings.nonce;
        s.parentNode.insertBefore(g, s);
    }(document, 'script'));
</script>