---
layout: post
title: "🚀 A New Website Is In The Works (Update)"
date: 2024-05-29 01:05:00 -0500
categories: website new
published: true
---

It looks as though God has once again directed me down the path of exploring self-employment and business ownership, and over the years I have explored many ideas in-depth. It's time for me to implement or put some of these ideas into action. 

> "In all labor there is profit, But idle chatter leads only to poverty." &mdash; Proverbs 14:23

I have been conflicted about making money from the ministry to the point where I won't do it. So I've decided to provide a service instead, a legitimate and perhaps separate entity from the ministry of ~70,000 that I've built with my programming skill that God has gifted me with.

> "Do you see a man skilled in his work? He will stand before kings; He will not stand before obscure men." &mdash; Proverbs 22:29

I tend to be distracted by my hobbies, like Chess for instance, but it's time I actually tried for once on making money apart from highly volatile investments and zero-sum games. 

> "Invest in seven ventures, yes, in eight; you do not know what disaster may come upon the land." &mdash; Ecclesiastes 11:2

It would be nice if there were a harmony between my efforts but I may need to focus directly on operation of this business for financial reasons. Of course the twitter bot will be left running, and this blog left up for edification.

> "For a dream cometh through the multitude of business; and a fool's voice is known by multitude of words." &mdash; Ecclesiastes 5:3

I would encourage Christians to not be afraid to make money or start businesses, because it is only the &ldquo;*love*&rdquo; of money that is evil, not survival or thriving. Christians would take back this country if we did.

> "The labour of the foolish wearieth every one of them, because he knoweth not how to go to the city." &mdash; Ecclesiastes 10:15

The choice to is yours. You can either own a business or work for someone who does. That is the way of the world. One thing is certain, you will work harder and sacrifice more than you ever have if you choose to run a business, until the day comes that it runs itself, then you go from self-employed to business owner.

There is a lot I wish I could reveal to you, but talk is cheap and actions speak louder than words. So I'm going to give this a try.


&mdash; SevenShepherd