---
layout: post
title: "⛪ Legalism And Antinomianism Are Two Sides Of The Same Heretical Coin"
date: 2024-02-19 04:05:00 -0500
categories: heresies heresy
published: true
---

<a name="contents" style="font-size:2.1em;color:black;">Contents</a>

1. <a href="#legalism">The Heresy Of Legalism</a>
    - 1.1 <a href="#packer-on-legalism">Packer On Legalism</a>
        - 1.1.1 <a href="#packer-on-liberty">Packer On Liberty</a>
2. <a href="#antinomianism">The Heresy Of Antinomianism</a>
    - 2.1 <a href="#packer-on-antinomianism">Packer On Antinomianism</a>


<a name="legalism" href="#contents" style="font-size:2.1em;">1. The Heresy Of Legalism</a>

<a name="packer-on-legalism" href="#contents" style="font-size:1.6em;">1.1 Packer On Legalism</a>

> 65\. LEGALISM
WORKING FOR GOD’S FAVOUR FORFEITS IT
>
>> . . . do not do what they do, for they do not practise what they preach. They tie up heavy loads and put them on men’s shoulders, but they themselves are not willing to lift a finger to move them. Everything they do is done for men to see . . .
Matthew 23:3–5
>
The New Testament views Christian obedience as the practice of ‘good
deeds’ (works). Christians are to be ‘rich in good deeds’ (1 Tim. 6:18; cf.
Matt. 5:16; Eph. 2:10; 2 Tim. 3:17; Titus 2:7, 14; 3:8, 14). A good deed is
one done (a) according to the right standard (God’s revealed will, i.e. his
moral law); (b) from a right motive (the love to God and others that marks
the regenerate heart); (c) with a right purpose (pleasing and glorifying God,
honouring Christ, advancing his kingdom, and benefiting one’s neighbour).
>
Legalism is a distortion of obedience that can never produce truly good
works. Its first fault is that it skews motive and purpose, seeing good deeds
as essentially ways to earn more of God’s favour than one has at the
moment. Its second fault is arrogance. Belief that one’s labour earns God’s
favour begets contempt for those who do not labour in the same way. Its
third fault is love-lessness in that its self-advancing purpose squeezes
humble kindness and creative compassion out of the heart.
>
In the New Testament we meet both Pharisaic and Judaizing legalism.
The Pharisees thought that their status as children of Abraham made God’s
pleasure in them possible, and that their formalized daily law-keeping,
down to minutest details, would make it actual. The Judaizers viewed
Gentile evangelism as a form of proselytizing for Judaism; they believed
that the Gentile believer in Christ must go on to become a Jew by
circumcision and observance of the festal calendar and ritual law, and that
thus he would gain increased favour with God. Jesus attacked the Pharisees;
Paul, the Judaizers.
>
The Pharisees were formalists, focusing entirely on the externals of
action, disregarding motives and purposes, and reducing life to mechanical
rule-keeping. They thought themselves faithful law-keepers although (a)
they majored in minors, neglecting what matters most (Matt. 23:23–24); (b)
their casuistry negated the law’s spirit and aim (Matt. 15:3–9; 23:16–24);
(c) they treated traditions of practice as part of God’s authoritative law, thus binding consciences where God had left them free (Mark 2:16 – 3:6; 7:1–
8); (d) they were hypocrites at heart, angling for man’s approval all the time
(Luke 20:45–47; Matt. 6:1–8; 23:2–7). Jesus was very sharp with them on
these points.
>
In Galatians, Paul condemns the Judaizers’ ‘Christ-plus’ message as
obscuring and indeed denying the all-sufficiency of the grace revealed in
Jesus (Gal. 3:1–3; 4:21; 5:2–6). In Colossians, he conducts a similar
polemic against a similar ‘Christ-plus’ formula for ‘fullness’ (i.e. spiritual
completion: Col. 2:8–23). Any ‘plus’ that requires us to take action in order
to add to what Christ has given us is a reversion to legalism and, in truth, an insult to Christ.
>
So far, then, from enriching our relationship with God, as it seeks to do,
legalism in all its forms does the opposite. It puts that relationship in
jeopardy and, by stopping us focusing on Christ, it starves our souls while
feeding our pride. **Legalistic religion in all its forms should be avoided like the plague.**

<a name="packer-on-liberty" href="#contents" style="font-size:1.6em;">1.1 Packer On Liberty</a>

> 64\. LIBERTY
SALVATION BRINGS FREEDOM
>
>> It is for freedom that Christ has set us free. Stand firm, then, and do not let yourselves be burdened again by a yoke of slavery.
Galatians 5:1
>
The New Testament sees salvation in Christ as liberation and the Christian
life as one of liberty – Christ has freed us for freedom (Gal. 5:1; John 8:32,
36). Christ’s liberating action is not a matter of socio-politico-economic
improvement, as is sometimes suggested today, but relates to the following
three points:
>
**1\.** Christians have been set free from the law as a system of salvation.
Being justified by faith in Christ, they are no longer under God’s law, but
under his grace (Rom. 3:19; 6:14–15; Gal. 3:23–25). This means that their
standing with God (the ‘peace’ and ‘access’ of Rom. 5:1–2) rests wholly on
the fact that they have been accepted and adopted in Christ. It does not, nor
ever will it, depend on what they do; it will never be imperilled by what
they fail to do. They live, and as long as they are in this world will live, not by being perfect, but by being forgiven.
>
All natural religion, then, is negated, for the natural instinct of fallen
man, as expressed in every form of religion that the world has ever devised,
is to suppose that one gains and keeps a right relationship with ultimate
reality (whether conceived as a personal God or in other terms) by
disciplines of law observance, right ritual, and asceticism. This is how the
world’s faiths prescribe the establishing of one’s own righteousness – the
very thing Paul saw unbelieving Jews trying to do (Rom. 10:3). Paul’s
experience had taught him that this is a hopeless enterprise. No human
performance is ever good enough, for there are always wrong desires in the
heart, along with a lack of right ones, regardless of how correct one’s
outward motions are (Rom. 7:7–11; cf. Phil. 3:6), and it is at the heart that
God looks first.
>
All the law can do is arouse, expose, and condemn the sin that
permeates our moral make-up, and so make us aware of its reality, depth,
and guilt (Rom. 3:19; 1 Cor. 15:56; Gal. 3:10). So the futility of treating the law as a covenant of works, and seeking righteousness by it, becomes plain
(Gal. 3:10–12; 4:21–31), as does the misery of not knowing what else to do.
This is the bondage to the law from which Christ sets us free.
>
**2\.** Christians have been set free from sin’s domination (John 8:34–36; Rom. 6:14–23). They have been supernaturally regenerated and made alive to God through union with Christ in his death and risen life (Rom. 6:3–11), and this means that the deepest desire of their heart now is to serve God by practising righteousness (Rom. 6:18, 22). Sin’s domination involved not only constant acts of disobedience, but also a constant lack of zeal for lawkeeping, rising sometimes to positive resentment and hatred towards the law. Now, however, being changed in heart, motivated by gratitude for acceptance through free grace, and energized by the Holy Spirit, they ‘serve in the new way of the Spirit, and not in the old way of the written code’ (Rom. 7:6). This means that their attempts at obedience are now joyful and integrated in a way that was never true before. Sin rules them no longer. In this respect, too, they have been liberated from bondage.
>
**3\.** Christians have been set free from the superstition that treats matter and physical pleasure as intrinsically evil. Against this idea, Paul insists that Christians are free to enjoy as God’s good gifts all created things and the pleasures that they yield (1 Tim. 4:1–5), provided only that we do not transgress the moral law in our enjoyments or hinder our own spiritual wellbeing or that of others (1 Cor. 6:12–13; 8:7–13). The Reformers renewed this emphasis against various forms of medieval legalism.

<br>

---

<br>

<a name="antinomianism" href="#contents" style="font-size:2.1em;">2. The Heresy Of Antinomianism</a>

Jude calls the church to defend the truth aggressively against this infiltration. Pay careful attention to the striking condemnation from Jude in this passage. The main points being the identifying points. The individuals who are marked out for condemnation meet the following criteria: 

> <sup style="font-weight:bold;">4</sup> For certain men have secretly slipped in among you—men who long ago were marked out for the condemnation I am about to describe—<span style="font-weight:bold;color:orangered;"><span style="font-size:1.2em;color:red;">ungodly men</span> who have turned the grace of our God into a <span style="font-size:1.2em;color:red;">license for evil</span></span> and who <span style="font-weight:bold;color:orangered;">deny our only <span style="font-size:1.2em;color:red;">Master and Lord</span>, Jesus Christ</span>. &mdash; Jude 1:4 NET

They pervert, twist, and distort the gospel, falsely teaching that our God's grace allows them to live immoral lives. The NET Bible nails it with the phrase *"turned the grace of our God into **a license for evil**."* Greek [“debauchery.”](https://www.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Jude%204&version=NET) This is the same word Peter uses to predict what the false teachers will be like (2 Pet 2:2, 7, 18). 

> <sup style="font-weight:bold;">1</sup> But false prophets arose among the people, just as <span style="font-weight:bold;">there will be false teachers among you. These false teachers will infiltrate your midst with destructive heresies,</span> <span style="font-weight:bold;color:orangered;">even to the point of denying the <span style="font-size:1.2em;color:red;">Master</span> who bought them</span>. As a result, they will bring swift destruction on themselves. <sup style="font-weight:bold;">2</sup> And <span style="font-weight:bold;color:orangered;">many will follow their <span style="font-size:1.2em;color:red;">debauched lifestyles</span></span>. Because of these false teachers, the way of truth will be slandered. &mdash; [2 Peter 2:1-2 NET](https://www.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=2+Peter+2%3A1-2&version=NET)

The phrase *"deny Jesus as Master and Lord"* is eerily reminiscent of modern neotheologies of today. They use the gospel to teach that grace is an excuse for ungodly living (cf. Rom. 3:8; 6:1, 15; 2 Pet. 3:15–16). Some even claiming you don't need to accept Jesus as Master & Lord to be saved!

> <sup style="font-weight:bold;">6</sup> What shall we say then? <span style="font-weight:bold;">Are we to remain in sin</span> so that grace may increase? <sup style="font-weight:bold;">2</sup> <span style="font-weight:bold;color:orangered;">Absolutely not!</span> How can we who died to sin still live in it? &mdash; Romans 6:1-2 NET

<!-- The Bible describes these ungodly men as worming (Jude 4 NLT) their way into churches (i.e. subversive) to preach and teach destructive heresies, even to the point of denying the Master who bought them. They lead and apparently teach debauched lifestyles, they commercialize Christianity like many of the false health & wealth prosperity gospel teachers. -->


Bearing fruit happens naturally for living trees, both in nature and metaphorically. A branch cannot bear fruit by itself (John 15:1-17). If a tree was genuinely alive it would bear fruit. It's the fruit of the Spirit, not the fruit of human decision (Gal 5:22-23). If the fruit isn’t growing the root is dead (Mt 3:8,10; Jn 15:8; Jas 2:17).

<!-- > Whoever says “I know him” but does not keep <span style="font-size:1.2em;font-weight:bold;color:red;">his commandments</span> <span style="font-weight:bold;color:orangered;">is a liar, and the truth is not in him</span>, &mdash; 1 John 2:4 ESV -->

> 3 And we can be sure that we know him if we obey his commandments. 4 <span style="font-weight:bold;color:orangered;">If someone claims, “I know God,” but doesn’t obey God’s commandments, that person is a liar and is not living in the truth.</span> 5 But those who obey God’s word truly show how completely they love him. <span style="font-weight:bold;color:ForestGreen;">That is how we know we are living in him.</span> 6 Those who say they live in God should live their lives as Jesus did. &mdash; 1 John 2:3-6 NLT

<span style="font-weight:bold;font-size:1.2em">This message is not legalistic</span>, it is not speaking of meriting or earning your salvation. This is speaking of the fruit of genuine saving faith. This is also not speaking of perfection (1Jn 2:1-3). It is simply saying, that if your faith is not superficial, your life will bare fruit (Gal 5:22-23; John 15:1-17). Justification is by faith alone (Rom. 3:28; Eph 2:8-10), but the faith that saves is never alone in the person justified (Jn 14:15,21).

> **Biblical faith is evidence-based.**... **Real faith in Christ shows itself by its fruit in the lives of those who profess it.** It is not a superficial thing. ... &mdash; Dr. John C. Lennox (PhD, University of Cambridge; DPhil, Emeritus Professor of Mathematics at the University of Oxford; DSc, Cardiff University), [*Determined to Believe?*. p. 136, 218, 313.](https://sevenshepherd.github.io/practicing-sin/#lennox)

Saving faith <span style="color:OrangeRed;">&ldquo;**does not include**&rdquo;</span> obedience, saving faith <span style="color:ForestGreen;">&ldquo;**results in**&rdquo;</span> obedience. Faith is not merely an intellectual assent to facts but instead a trust and reliance in Christ. Genuine saving faith will always be accompanied by good works that come <span style="color:ForestGreen;">&ldquo;**after justification**&rdquo;</span>. Good works and continuing to believe <span style="color:ForestGreen;">&ldquo;**follow**&rdquo;</span> saving faith (*sola fide*).

<!-- > if we obey his commandments. <sup style="font-weight:bold;">4</sup> <span style="font-weight:bold;">If someone claims, “I know God,” but doesn’t obey God’s commandments, <span style="color:orangered;">that person is a <span style="font-size:1.2em;color:red;">liar</span> and is not living in the truth</span>.</span> <sup style="font-weight:bold;">5</sup> But those who **obey** God’s word truly show how completely they love him. **That is how we know** we are living in him. <sup style="font-weight:bold;">6</sup> <span style="font-weight:bold;color:orangered;">Those who say they live in God should live their lives as Jesus did.</span> &mdash; 1 John 2:3-6 [NLT](https://www.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=John+3%3A36%3B+1Jn+2%3A3-6&version=ESV;NET;NLT) -->

> <sup style="font-weight:bold;">8</sup> The one who practices sin is of the devil, because the devil has been sinning from the beginning. For this purpose the Son of God was revealed: to destroy the works of the devil. <sup style="font-weight:bold;">9</sup> Everyone who has been fathered by God does not practice sin, because God’s seed resides in him, and thus he is not able to sin, because he has been fathered by God. <sup style="font-weight:bold;">10</sup> By this the children of God and the children of the devil are revealed: Everyone who does not practice righteousness—the one who does not love his fellow Christian—is not of God. &mdash; 1 Jn 3:8-10 NET

> ... They will consider nothing sacred. They will be unloving and unforgiving; they will slander others and have no self-control. They will be cruel and hate what is good. They will betray their friends, be reckless, be puffed up with pride, and love pleasure rather than God. <span style="font-weight:bold;color:orangered;">They will <span style="font-size:1.2em;color:red;">act religious</span>, but they will <span style="font-size:1.2em;color:red;">reject the power that could make them godly</span>. Stay away from people like that!</span> &mdash; 2 Timothy 3:2-5b

> <sup style="font-weight:bold;">21</sup> <span style="font-weight:bold;">It would be better if they had never known the way to righteousness than to know it and then reject the **command** they were given <span style="font-weight:bold;color:orangered;">to live a</span> <span style="font-size:1.2em;color:red;">holy life</span>.</span> <sup style="font-weight:bold;">22</sup> They prove the truth of this proverb: <span style="font-weight:bold;">“A dog returns to its vomit.”</span> And another says, “A washed pig returns to the mud.” &mdash; 2 Peter 2:21-22 NLT

<a name="packer-on-antinomianism" href="#contents" style="font-size:1.6em;">2.1 Packer On Antinomianism</a>

> 66\. ANTINOMIANISM
WE ARE NOT SET FREE TO SIN
>
>>Dear children, do not let anyone lead you astray. He who does what is right
is righteous, just as he [Christ] is righteous.
1 John 3:7
>
Antinomianism, which means being ‘anti-law’, is a name for several views
that have denied that God’s law in Scripture should directly control the
Christian’s life.
>
**Dualistic antinomianism** appears in the Gnostic heretics against whom
Jude and Peter wrote (Jude 4–19; 2 Pet. 2). This view sees salvation as for
the soul only, and bodily behaviour as irrelevant both to God’s interest and
to the soul’s health, so one may behave riotously and it will not matter.
>
**Spirit-centred antinomianism** puts such trust in the Holy Spirit’s inward
prompting as to deny any need to be taught by the law how to live. Freedom
from the law as a way of salvation is assumed to bring with it freedom from
the law as a guide to conduct. In the first hundred and fifty years of the
Reformation era this kind of antinomianism often threatened, and Paul’s
insistence that a truly spiritual person acknowledges the authority of God’s
Word through Christ’s apostles (1 Cor. 14:37; cf. 7:40) suggests that the
Spirit-obsessed Corinthian church was in the grip of the same mindset.
>
**Christ-centred antinomianism** argues that God sees no sin in believers,
because they are in Christ, who kept the law for them, and therefore what
they actually do makes no difference, provided that they keep believing.
But 1 John 1:8 – 2:1 (expounding 1:7) and 3:4–10 point in a different
direction, showing that it is not possible to be in Christ and at the same time to embrace sin as a way of life.
>
**Dispensational antinomianism** holds that keeping the moral law is at no
stage necessary for Christians, since we live under a dispensation of grace,
not of law. Romans 3:31 and 1 Corinthians 6:9–11 clearly show, however,
that law-keeping is a continuing obligation for Christians. ‘I am not free
from God’s law but am under Christ’s law,’ says Paul (1 Cor. 9:21).
>
**Dialectical antinomianism**, as in Barth and Brunner, denies that biblical
law is God’s direct command and affirms that the Bible’s imperative
statements trigger the Word of the Spirit, which when it comes may or may
not correspond exactly to what is written. The inadequacy of the neoorthodox view of biblical authority, which explains the inspiration of
Scripture in terms of the Bible’s instrumentality as a channel for God’s
present-day utterances to his people, is evident here.
>
**Situationist antinomianism** says that a motive and intention of love is all
that God now requires of Christians, and the commands of the Decalogue
and other ethical parts of Scripture, for all that they are ascribed to God
directly, are mere rules of thumb for loving, rules that love may at any time
disregard. But Romans 13:8–10, to which this view appeals, teaches that
without love as a motive these specific commands cannot be fulfilled. Once
more an unacceptably weak view of Scripture surfaces.
>
It must be stressed that the moral law, as crystallized in the Decalogue
and opened up in the ethical teaching of both Testaments, is one coherent
law, given to be a code of practice for God’s people in every age. In
addition, repentance means resolving henceforth to seek God’s help in
keeping that law. The Spirit is given to empower law-keeping and make us
more and more like Christ, the archetypal law-keeper (Matt. 5:17). This
law-keeping is in fact the fulfilling of our human nature, and Scripture
holds out no hope of salvation for any who, whatever their profession of
faith, do not seek to turn from sin to righteousness (1 Cor. 6:9–11; Rev.
21:8).

<script>
    var refTagger = {
        settings: {
            bibleVersion: 'NLT'
        }
    }; 

    (function(d, t) {
        var n=d.querySelector('[nonce]');
        refTagger.settings.nonce = n && (n.nonce||n.getAttribute('nonce'));
        var g = d.createElement(t), s = d.getElementsByTagName(t)[0];
        g.src = 'https://api.reftagger.com/v2/RefTagger.js';
        g.nonce = refTagger.settings.nonce;
        s.parentNode.insertBefore(g, s);
    }(document, 'script'));
</script>


<script>
    var refTagger = {
        settings: {
            bibleVersion: 'ESV'
        }
    }; 

    (function(d, t) {
        var n=d.querySelector('[nonce]');
        refTagger.settings.nonce = n && (n.nonce||n.getAttribute('nonce'));
        var g = d.createElement(t), s = d.getElementsByTagName(t)[0];
        g.src = 'https://api.reftagger.com/v2/RefTagger.js';
        g.nonce = refTagger.settings.nonce;
        s.parentNode.insertBefore(g, s);
    }(document, 'script'));
</script>